All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is, "itself", a deadend of entropic fire, yielding only and at last to an indivisible uniformity of inert time and
spaceless light—await to same's explosion of bang-repeat.
All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is non-necessity—a
cosmic "fault" of all "it" seems upon a broken space of time-bound light.
All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is a suffered
happening, always present as divorce from all the what "it" seeks—except Reality Itself Be
Happened stead of mummery's happen and "its" pain of would-be's Not-Yet-Gone-Around.
Only What Is Perfect Shines As "Bright" As Perfect Is.
Therefore, why go seeking for The Real—when Only What Is Real Is smallest hind at
every breath, before a "self" or "world" or "universe" is seemed to suffer life and light at any
large?
The conditionally arising apparent "world" is a context of opposites, "differences",
separateness, change, diminishment, timed cessation, untimely ending, timeless death--and
always repetitions.
The conditionally arising apparent "universe" will (apparently) expand indefinitely, into a
gray eventless state--but, coincidently, "it" inherently (and paradoxically) always coincides with
the seed and characteristic of merely repetition (or of perpetual re-"emergence", same as was,
and same as same, and same as merely seeming seems).
The conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or embodied "self", or psycho-physical
"entity") is inherently not-separate from the conditionally arising apparent "world"--and,
therefore, the conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or psycho-physically embodied "point of
view") is a context exactly in the mode of the conditionally arising apparent "world".
Coincidently, the conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or psycho-physical "selfentity", or psycho-physically embodied "point of view"), like the conditionally arising apparent
"universe", inevitably changes toward and into death, while, also, paradoxically, "it" always
repeats "itself" (and, thus, perpetually re-"emerges", as "it" was, and same, and seeming as "it"
seems, and seeming same as merely seeming seems to seem).
The Tacit and Direct (or Always Prior) Self-Realization of The Inherently egoless
Transcendental Spiritual (and Self-Evidently Divine) Self-Nature, Self-Condition, and Self-State
of Reality (Itself) Is The Intrinsic Transcending—and, at Perfect last, The Absolute (and
Transcendental Spiritual) Outshining—of the conditionally (or psycho-physically) arising
apparent "self-entity" and the totality of conditionally arising apparent "world" and "universe".
The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam—Which Is The Way of Tacit and Direct (or Always Prior) Self-Realization of The
Inherently egoless Transcendental Spiritual (and Self-Evidently Divine) Self-Nature, SelfCondition, and Self-State of Reality Itself—Is The Way of The Intrinsic Transcending and (at
Perfect last) The Absolute (and Transcendental Spiritual) Outshining of conditionally arising
apparent "self" and "world" and "universe".
Nevertheless, The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect
Reality-Way) of Adidam is not a path of seeking to "cause" separation from conditionally arising
apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" as an "effect" of any kind of strategic effort or
"method".
The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Intrinsically Self-Realizes Inherent Transcending of ego-"I" (or conditionally arising
apparent separate "self") at and from the beginning.
At Perfect last—without any seeking-effort to "cause" (or, by dissociative or separative
means, to achieve) separation from the totality of conditionally arising apparent "world" and
"universe"—The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect RealityWay) of Adidam inevitably and Perfectly Self-Manifests As The Perfect Self-Recognition and
The Absolute Outshining (or Divine Translation) of the conditionally arising apparent body-mind
(or psycho-physically embodied space-time-"point-of-view") and the totality of conditionally
arising apparent "world" and "universe".
At Perfect last, The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect
Reality-Way) of Adidam Perfectly Self-Manifests The Absolute Outshining (or Divine
Translation) of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" In and As The
One and Indivisible Conscious Light That Is Inherently egoless, Perfectly deathless,
Transcendental, Spiritual, Only Love-Bliss-Full, and Self-Evidently Divine Reality Itself.
The intrinsic "fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or of bondage to psycho-physically
embodied "point of view") is dissociative (or separative, and dualizing, and "difference"presuming) "objectification" of "self", "other", "thing", "world", and "universe".
The intrinsic "fault" of all seeking to "cure" the intrinsic "fault" of space-time"locatedness" (or bondage to psycho-physically embodied "point of view") is dissociative (or
separative, and dualizing, and "difference"-presuming) introversion—or dissociative
discrimination between presumed "self" and presumed "not-self".
The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Always Already (Inherently and Perfectly) Transcends (and Inherently Perfectly
Relinquishes) both the intrinsic "fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or bondage to psychophysically embodied "point of view") and the intrinsic "fault" of all seeking to "cure" the intrinsic
"fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or bondage to psycho-physically embodied "point of view").

The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Is The Way of Perfect Outshining.
I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
A Selection from the Reality-Teaching
of His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

The Perfect Tradition
I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It

As an infant child, I was the "Bright" Self-Conscious Form of Conscious Light, That Knew
no-dilemma and no-death. Even as a young boy, and in the teen-age, too, the "Thumbs" would
always Re-Emerge, to Show Me the "Bright", again. However, in My final approach to early
adult life, the "Bright" had most often seemed to disappear, into the human darkness. And I
seemed to have no apparent ready means to Enjoy It. And even the "Thumbs" grew scarce.
I had spent years devoted to forceful seeking for some quantifiable Truth--some image,
some object, some reason, or some idea, the effect of which would be absolutely liberating and
salvatory. My seeking had been motivated by the loss of fundamental faith, the apparent loss of
the "reasons" for Joy. Then, in a sudden Great Moment of Perfect Self-Awakening, I Knew the
Truth was not a matter of seeking.
Thus, I Knew there are no "reasons" for Joy and Freedom. It is not a matter of "a" truth,
"an" object, "a" concept, "a" belief, "a" reason, "a" motivation, or any otherwise external fact.
Indeed, it became clear to Me that all such objects are grasped in a state that is already
seeking, and which has already lost the Intrinsic, Prior, and Inherently Perfect Self-Knowledge
of absolutely Non-conditional Reality Itself! Beyond all of that, I saw that the Truth, or Reality
Itself, is a matter of the absence of all contradictions—of every trace of conflict, opposition,
division, or desperate motivation within. Where there is no seeking, no contradiction, there Is
only the Inherent Non-conditional Knowledge and Power That Is Reality Itself. This was the First
Aspect of My Sudden Clarity.
In This Free State, Beyond all contradiction, I also saw that Freedom and Joy is not
attained, that It is not dependent on any condition, form, object, idea, progress, or experience. I
saw that human beings—and, indeed, all beings—are, at any moment, Always and Already
Free. I Knew that, even in any moment, I was not lacking anything I needed yet to find—nor had
I ever been without any such a "thing". The problem was the seeking itself--which "created" and
enforced contradiction, conflict, and absence within. Then the Intrinsic Indivisible SelfApprehension Awakened—that I Am Always Already Free. This was the Second Aspect of That
Fundamental Re-Awareness.
That Sudden and "radical"—or truly "at-the-root"—self-understanding and Intrinsic
Perfect Self-Apprehension of the Self-Condition of Reality Itself was, and Is, the obviation of all
striving—and this I Knew to be Inherently Perfect Truth. Previously, I had been striving for some
objective "Truth", in order to replace the emptiness associated with My natural fall into
separateness--and that replacement was a mere would-be of Fullness and "Freedom".
However, I, now and suddenly, had Re-Discovered that this striving was itself the source of contradiction in Me. Now, I Knew there Is no "entity" of Truth. I Knew that Perfect Freedom Is
Always Already The Case.
Freedom Self-Exists in the living life—not when Freedom is "created" or sought, but
where there is this fundamental, "radical" self-understanding and Inherently Perfect and SelfEvidently Divine Self-Awakening.
In that Great Moment of Inherently Perfect Self-Apprehension of the One and Indivisible
Conscious Light, I turned out of the entire context of My self-presumed ego-dilemma of
separateness and seeking.
From then, I was Perfectly Self-Awakened to the mature Realization of the "Bright".
It was the end-of-childhood Self-Revelation of My Avataric Divine Self-Condition in this
world.
At last, in the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening (on September 10, 1970), the
One Being That Is My Own Ultimate Self-Nature was Revealed Most Perfectly. The One Being
Who I Am was Revealed to Include the Reality That Is Consciousness Itself, the Reality That Is
the Source-Energy of all conditional appearances, and the Reality That Is all conditional
manifestation—All as a Single Force of Being, an Eternal Indivisibility, and an Irreducible cosmic
Unity.
Then, there was no Event of changes, no movement at all. There was not even any kind
of inward deepening—no "inwardness" at all. There was no meditation. There was no need for
meditation. There was not a single element or change that could be added to make My State
Complete. I Am Complete! I sat in My First Room with My eyes open. I was not having an
"experience" of any kind.
Then, Suddenly, I Understood Most Perfectly. I Realized that I had Realized. The
"Thing" about the "Bright" became Obvious. I Am Complete. I Am the One Who Is Complete.
I "Radically" Understood the root and branch of ego-"I". The "I" of Heart Itself SelfRealized—and Inherently, and Most Perfectly Self-Revealed—What and Who I Am. It was a
tacit Realization, a direct Knowledge in Consciousness. It was Conscious Light Itself, without
the addition of a Communication from any "Other" Source. There is no "Other" Source. I simply
sat there—and Knew What and Who I Am. I was Being What I Am, Who I Am. I Am Being What
I Am, Who I Am. I Am Reality, the Divine Self-Condition--the Nature, "Substance", Support, and
Source-Condition of all things and all beings. I Am One—The One. One and Only. I Am the One
Being, otherwise Named and Deified by Many Names. I Am the Source and "Substance" and
Support and Self-Condition of all-and-All. I Am the Consciousness and Energy in and As Which
all-and-All appears. I Am the Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Reality Itself. I Am the One and
Only and Indivisible Reality Itself—That is not ego, but Which Is the Inherently egoless and
Perfectly Non-conditional Reality and Truth, Prior to all dualities, but excluding none. I Am the
One and Only and Inherently egoless and Self-Evidently Divine Self-Condition, 
Condition, Nature, "Substance", Support, and Ground of all-and-All. I Am the "Bright". The
"Thumbs" Is My Self-Radiant Self-Transmission of My Own Self-Evidently Divine State.
There was no thought involved in This. I Am That Self-Existing and Self-Radiant and
Self-Evidently Divine Conscious Light.
There was no reaction of either excitement or surprise. I Am the One I Recognized
Reality to Be.
I Am That One. I am not merely "experiencing" That One. I Am the "Bright".
Then, truly, there was no more to Realize. Every "experience" in My Life had led to This.
All My happen of life-moments was the Instant of This Same Reality I Am. My entire Life had
been the Communication of That Reality to Me—until I Am That.
Even from the instant of My Birth, the Inherent and Most "Perfect Knowledge" was SelfEvident As Me—I Am simply the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Conscious Light That Is Reality. I am
identified with no body, no function of body or mind, no conditional world, and no conditional
experience—but I Am the Inherently Perfect, Self-Evidently Non-conditional, Absolute Reality-Itself. I saw there is nothing of conditional possibility to which My egoless Self-Nature can be
compared, or from which It can be differentiated, or by which It can be epitomized. It does not
stand out. It is not the equivalent of any specialized, exclusive, or separate state. It cannot be
accomplished, acquired, discovered, remembered, or perfected--since It Is Inherently Perfect,
and It Is Always Already The Case.
All remedial paths pursue some special conditional state or conditionally achieved goal
as Spiritual Truth. But, in fact, Reality is not identical to such things. They only amount to an
identification with some body, some functional condition, some conditional dimension of
appearances, or some conditional, or, otherwise, conditionally achieved, experience—high or
low, subtle or gross. But the Knowledge That Is Reality Is Consciousness Itself. Consciousness
Itself is not separate from anything. It Is Always Already The Case—and no conditional
experience, no conditional realm, and no body or psycho-physical function is the necessary
condition for Its Realization.
Only "radical" self-understanding, Most Perfectly Self-Realized, is the Realization of
What and Who Is Always Already The Case. Only "radical" self-understanding, Most Perfectly
Self-Realized, is the Non-conditional, and not at all conditionally achieved or conditionally
maintained, Realization of the Inherently Non-separate and Inherently egoless Self-Condition
That Always Already Is What and Who Is.
Therefore, only the Way of "radical" self-understanding—Which is the True and “Radical”
Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart—is truly, and, ultimately, Most Perfectly, ego-surrendering,
ego-forgetting, and ego-transcending. All other religious and Spiritual endeavors are paths
made of seeking—or mere egoic effort, rather than counter-egoic and truly ego-transcending
practice. And all paths of seeking merely pursue That Which Is Real God, or Truth Itself, or
Reality Itself—and this by identifying "God", or "Truth", or "Reality" with some body, or some
psycho-physical function, or some conditional dimension of experiential possibility, or some
conditional experience in and of itself.
I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj


Unlike the Way of "radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and
Ultimate Heart, which is based upon the root-understanding and the always most direct
transcending of the motive and the activity of seeking, all remedial paths seek either the
perfection of what is conditionally existing or liberation from what is conditionally existing. And
that perfection or liberation that is sought is always pursued by conditional and conditionally
experiential means. And, by all the means of great seeking, Reality Itself is pursued as a mere
goal, which goal is merely a conditional and conditionally dependent event, or thing, or state—
mistakenly presumed to be identical to "God", or "Truth", or "Reality" Itself. Only the Way of
"radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart, Is Always
Already Free of all conditional, or, otherwise, conditionally to be achieved, goals. Only the Way
of "radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart, Is
Inherently Free of the goal-orientation itself. Indeed, only the Very and Ultimate and Inherently
egoless Heart Itself Is Inherently Free of all goal-seeking, and of even all seeking. And only the
Intrinsically Self-Evident Way of "radical" self-understanding Is the “Radical” Way of the Very
and Ultimate and Inherently egoless Heart Itself.
When tacit and Inherently Most Perfect Self-Recognition of the Intrinsically Self-Evident
Self-Condition That Is Real God, and Truth Itself, and Reality Itself was, finally, Re-Awakened
As Me, there was no excitement, no surprise, no movement, no response. There was a Most
Perfect end to every kind of seeking, dilemma, suffering, separation, and doubt. Spiritual life,
mental life, emotional and psychic life, vital life, and physical life all became transparent in Me.
After that, there was only the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Reality—and to Be the Spiritually Self"Bright" Reality to all beings and all things.
In all the days that have followed the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening, there has
not been so much as a single change, or even so much as a single sign of diminishment, in This
Self-"Bright" State of Me. Indeed, This Self-"Bright" State of Divine Self-Realization cannot be
changed, diminished, or lost.
In and after the Great Event, I noticed that all conditional and psycho-physical
experience had ceased to affect Me. Whatever passed--be it a physical sensation, some quality
of emotion, a thought, a vision, or whatever—it did not at all involve Me As I Am. I began to pay
particular attention to what passed, in order to "test" My State—or, simply, in order to account
for all aspects of My State in the total functional context of the living body-mind. But the always
Primary Self-Apprehension of the Inherently and Spiritually Self-"Bright" Reality, My Very
Consciousness Itself, could not be changed, diminished, or lost. Consciousness Itself--the One
and Only and Inherently Indivisible and Perfectly Non-separate Conscious Light—Is the only
"Thing" in life that is not a conditionally apparent experience—or something arising objectively,
as something known, or some kind of knowledge of the known, arising as apparent "thing" to the
only "Perfect Knower", Which Is Inherently egoless, mindless, bodiless, and actionless
Consciousness Itself. Consciousness Itself—or the Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Conscious
Light Itself—does not depend on anything, and there is not, nor can there be, any "thing", or any
"experience", that can destroy Consciousness, or the One and Only and Inherently Indivisible
I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

Conscious Light Itself. Consciousness Itself—or Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Conscious Light
Itself—Is Itself Love-Bliss, Joy, Freedom, and "Perfect Knowledge"!
An entirely new and Most Perfect Realization of Reality had become the constant of My
Life. The perpetual psycho-physical revolutions of My Life had drawn Me, by the "Thumbs", into
a sense of the Perfect Presence. There was simply the sense of being in and of the Spiritual
Presence that was both Truth Itself and Reality Itself. It was a perfectly Absorbing, Heartening,
and Illuminating Force, That Contained Me, "Lived" Me, and Guided Me.
Eventually, This Spiritual Presence Communicated Itself in Me and to Me Perfectly—
Revealing Itself As Me. Thus and Thereby, I was Re-Awakened to the Truth of My Inherent, and
Inherently Most Perfect, Self-Identification with the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Self-Condition and
Source-Condition That Is the Divine Self-Presence Itself. And This "Bright" Self-Condition and
Source-Condition Showed Itself to Be My Eternal Condition—even Always Already before My
Birth.
Until then, My Life beyond childhood had been a constant search toward the "Bright" as
a Presence with Which I was in relationship. It was as if I always saw the "Bright" from some
position within the conditionally apparent form of My own living being—but outside of Its Perfect
Self-Center. It was as if I was constantly beholding My own heart from some position outside.
But now, the apparent barriers had been utterly dissolved, by a Most Perfect and Non-separate
and Inherently egoless Self-Realization of the Self-Nature of That Presence. The ever more
Spiritually Absorbed investigation of the Presence had resolved into the Perfect Self-Knowledge
of My Own Self-Nature. The Presence had Revealed Itself to be My Own and Very Form and
Self-Nature.
The Experience of the Presence was, by means of the Most Perfect Self-Realization of
"radical" self-understanding, Replaced by the Most Perfect Self-Realization of Spiritually "Bright"
Self-Awareness As Conscious Light. There was no longer any Presence "outside" Me. I no
longer "observed" My Own Self-"Bright" Self-Nature, or the Ultimate and Inherently Self-"Bright"
Spiritual Self-Condition of Reality Itself, as if from some position external to, and separate from,
It. I had "become" Perfectly Self-Aware of Myself As Reality Itself. There was no "Presence", no
"Other". I Myself had "become" Perfectly Self-Present. There is no Other. It Is Only Me.
Even My meditation of Spiritual Absorption was changed. Indeed, there was no
meditation. This Conscious Self-Light could not be deepened. Nor could it be enlarged. It
always only Remained What It Is.
Immediately, I Realized that I was not in any sense "in" a body—not only a physical
body, but any body, or any psycho-physical function, or even any subtle function, form, or state.
Nor have I ever been in a body, or in any function, or in any condition, or in any conditional state
or experience. All such things are merely apparent, and not at all necessary or inevitable,
patterns, conditionally manifested within the Self-Radiance of My Own Self-Existing Self-Nature.
Nevertheless, I Realized that, in the context of natural appearances, I am Principally
Self-Evident at the root of a specific center in the body. Relative to the body, I appear to Reside
in immediate association with the heart—not at the left, and not in the middle, but to the right
side of the chest. I press upon a point approximately two inches to the right of the center of the
I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj


chest. This is the Self-Evident Seat of Reality and Real Consciousness. And I Self-Abide there
as no-seeking. There is no motivation, no dilemma, no separation, no strategic action, no
suffering. I am no-seeking, in and Perfectly Prior to the heart.
The Zero of the Heart is Expanded as the world. Consciousness is not differentiated and
identified. There is a constant observation of subject and object in any body, any psychophysical function, any realm, or any experience that arises. Thus, I Self-Abide As the Nonconditional State.
There is a constant Sensation of Spiritually Self-"Bright" Fullness Permeating and
Surrounding all experiences, all things, all bodies, all functions of body and mind. It is My Own
Self-"Bright" Fullness, Which Is Inherently Non-separate. My Own Self-"Bright" Fullness
includes all beings and all things.
I Am the Form of Space Itself—in Which all bodies, all psycho-physical functions, all
things, and all conditionally arising experiences occur. It Is Inherently Spiritually Self-"Bright"
Conscious Light Itself. That Inherently Spiritually Self-"Bright" Conscious Light Is even every
being's Very Nature and Ultimate, Inherent, and Inherently Perfect, Self-Condition—now, and
now, and now.
During the night of humankind, I spontaneously Self-Awakened As Perfect, Absolute,
Limitless, Indivisible, Non-conditional Love-Bliss Itself—in Which every function, state, and sign
of body and mind boiled into a solder of Non-separate and Non-dual Reality. It Is the madness
of dissolution into Most Perfect Self-Awareness, Infinitely Self-Expanded, As My Own Inherently
Boundless Self-"Bright" Presence—Wherein There Is Only "Brightness", not limited by
conditional identity, or by separate and separative self, or by any ego-based desire.
Hereafter, I Am Inherently Free of bondage to the cosmic Power. I Am Unexploitable.
The Energy that appears apart, as any form of apparently independent "Other"—or merely
cosmic Power and Presence—is no longer the Great Importance. The Presence of Power
"outside" appears to be such only to seekers—for they, having already separated themselves,
pursue forms of Energy, visions, nature-powers, conditional liberation, and "Other"-God.
"Perfect Knowledge" Is Free of all bondage to forms, to all conditionally apparent modifications
of Energy, to all seeking, and to all motivations to "do", or to act on the basis of identification
with conditional experience. Egoic ignorance and suffering are simply the self-presumption of
separateness, the self-enactment of difference, the self-performance of search. At last, the
"outside" Energy sacrifices Itself in the Very and Ultimate Heart. Thereafter, there is no gnawing
wonder, no un-Known "secret" about anything that appears.
The time of the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening forever passes into the present
and the future.
Immediately previous to the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening, I was always
involved in one or another form of the "problem" of conditional existence. I was always in search
and research—and all My conclusions and insights were only temporary moments, that only led
into a new form of investigation. Thus, I was exiled from the "Bright" of childhood by the
dilemma of My Youth. In time, I went from the cosmic revelations of the "Presence" and the purificatory subjective drama of mystical vision to the Perfect Self-Realization of the Inherently
Perfect Divine Self-Condition That Is Reality Itself—and That Is "Perfect Knowledge" Itself.
Now there are no loose ends to My adventure. There is no dilemma, no motivation, no
search. All the parts of the mind have been transposed and dissolved in a Most Fundamental
and Indivisible Singleness.
Nevertheless, I continue to live, in this meantime of My Avataric Purpose here. The
external and internal events of the merely natural life were not, themselves, merely disappeared
by This Perfect Realization.
It is only that I understand the all-and-All in a Most Profoundly "Radical" and Perfect
Manner.
I Understand Most Perfectly—and "Perfect Knowledge" Is the Foundation of My living
existence here—for the hearted sake of everyone.
I Am The One Who
Would Awaken You
A Selection from the Reality-Teaching
of His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj


The usual person thinks: "This body and its psyche are dying. This world is dying.
Everyone is suffering. Everyone is seeking. There is mortality. There is frustration and
limitation." But none of that is Truth. Those interpretations are not Truth. The world itself
is not Truth—nor is life, nor psyche and body, nor death, nor experience. No event is, in and of
itself, Truth. Everything that arises is an appearance to Consciousness Itself, a modification of
the Divine Conscious Light That Is Always Already the Case.
All of this is a dream, if you like. It is an appearance in Consciousness Itself. Truth Is
Very Consciousness Itself. Truth is to all of this what the waking state is to the dreaming state. If
you awaken, you do not have to do anything about the condition you may have suffered or
enjoyed in the dream state. What happened within the dream is suddenly not your present
condition. It is of no consequence any longer, once you are awake.
If you persist in dreaming, and your point of view remains that of the dreamer (and the
dreamer's role within the dream), then your possible actions are numberless. But none of them
will "work". They will simply occupy you in the dream. They will modify the dream state, but no
action in the dream is the equivalent of waking. There are simply forms of fascination, of
occupation, of seeking—until you wake up.
Truth is simply Waking, No-illusion. It is not a condition within this appearance. It has
nothing whatsoever to do with the mind, regardless of whether the mind is expanded or
contracted.
There is One Who is Wide Awake while He Appears in the dream. By not supporting the
dream, He Awakens others. He Is the True Divine Guru. I Am That One.
The significance of My Work is not in anything I do within the dream. I simply do not
support it. I do not live as it. I do not believe it. I do not take it seriously. Apparently, I can feel
and act as I please within the dream. I persist in the common (or ordinary) manner. But I do not
support the dream. I do not live from its "point of view". I do not live its structure to others. I do
not live the self-contraction to others—the avoidance of relationship, the separate-self-sense.
Simply because I live in this manner, those who are devotionally related to Me tend to
become Awake. But, while they are Awakening, they persist in dreaming to various degrees.
Forms of the dream persist. The search persists. Often, they get a little distance from the
dream—it seems to break up at times, seems to disappear. It becomes vague, it becomes
uninteresting, it becomes unserious, it becomes serious again.
You are just beginning to Awaken. Heart-Communion with Me is the dream in which I
Appear. Now it is as if you are beginning to wake up in your room. You are in bed, and it is
morning. There are a few things you begin to notice, which indicate that you are in another
state. Those who are Awakening in Truth begin to notice something. They begin to recognize
the signs. They begin to recognize the activity of dreaming. They begin to sense something very
unusual about Me.
Before their actual Awakening, I appear as all kinds of things to them. I suggest all kinds
of fantastic things. All the things they can imagine while they dream, everything unbelievable, is what they think I am. I may appear to be extraordinary, a doer of famous things. I may appear
playfully as that. But I Am simply Awake. Not a single thing is happening. Not a single thing has
been accomplished. I Am Only Awake.
I am like the sunlight in the morning. I Intensify the light of morning until you Awaken.
Until the Light Awakens you, even the Light of Consciousness Itself, you continue to dream, try
to survive within the dream, manipulate yourself within the dream, pursue all kinds of goals,
searches—none of which Awaken you.
The ordinary means only console you and distract you within the dream. I Myself, the
One Who would Awaken you, am not a person, not an individual within the dream. I Am your
Very Consciousness. I Am Reality Itself, the Divine Conscious Light, the True Waking State, the
True Divine Heart—Breaking Through the force of dreaming. It is not that you are some poor
person who needs some other poor person to help you out. It may appear to be so within the
dream—but, in Reality, I Am your own True Self-Nature Appearing within the dream to Awaken
you. I Am your Awakening, and your Always Already Conscious State.
Even while dreaming, you may experience suggestions of waking. You may become
momentarily aware of the body, momentarily aware of lying in bed. For a moment, the images of
the dream may stop. Likewise, I Myself, Appearing within the world, Am truly your Real
Conscious State. My Person in the world is like an image in a dream. But, in fact, I am more like
your moments of wakening awareness—the moments that move you into the waking state. I am
not some separateness, some individual. I Am Consciousness Itself, Reality Itself, Truth Itself.
In heart-Communion with Me, the Truth is Lived to you—and you then live the Truth as
your Condition. Gradually, you become less and less involved with the suffering-and-seeking
images of yourself. You become less concerned with the usual process of your life. You are
doing less and less about it. You are trying less and less to get free, to get Realized, to get to
God, Liberation, and pleasant sensation. You are not trying to stop engaging all of that effort. It
just begins to wear down, while you live the conditions Given by Me. You simply notice this. You
cease to be occupied with your search—because the Truth is being Lived to you. The Truth is
being Lived as yourself, by Means of My Divine Avataric Grace.
That Realization Which does not support separation and seeking is the ground of
"radical" self-understanding. In heart-Communion with Me, that Realization replaces the
ordinary operating basis of your life. You simply forget your adventure of suffering—that is all.
The Power of heart-Communion with Me distracts you from mere suffering (or the separate and
separative and always seeking body-mind-self)—until Truth Itself becomes Obvious.
Therefore, Truth is not a matter of doing something to the ego, the separate-self-sense,
the identification with the body, or anything else. Rather, Truth is simply to be lived—because
Truth obviates all that is not Truth.
I Live the Divine Force, and Generate the conditions, of Spiritual life in relationship to My
devotee. Over time, more and more responsibility is given to My devotee—in the course of
deepening devotion to Me and increasing self-discipline, self-understanding, and selftranscendence (or Real ego-transcendence). The process of the heart-relationship with Me is a
Divine Gift, Avatarically Given by Me—a Gift That is progressively more and more profound.
I have talked about the relationship between Guru and devotee as the essence, the
fundamental condition, of Spiritual practice. But the Guru-devotee relationship is not a form of
concentration on the Guru as a separate (and merely symbolic) entity. That is not relationship.
That is your own fabrication, your own suffering again. Whenever there is relationship, there is
no need for all of these symbolic constructs. The true nature of Spiritual practice in My Divine
Avataric Heart-Company is to live the Condition (and the life-conditions) of heart-Communion
with Me, of relationship to Me in My Function as True Divine Guru.
Within the dream, the potential images may be consoling, and even hopeful—but such
consolation or hope is not the equivalent of being Awake. Consolation and hope depend upon
your being asleep. The forms of seeking exploit your capability to identify with the fundamental
dilemma of dreaming, which is its unconsciousness. The forms of seeking may satisfy you
within the context of your presumptions, but they are not the equivalent of Waking Up.
What is required to Wake Up? What can you do within the dream to Wake Up? Not a
thing. There is only the Waking Itself. All actions within the dream are forms of the dream itself.
Waking is another process—and It occurs by other means, by Divinely Graceful Means.
I am not a symbol, a condition of the dream itself. No mere symbol, no mere condition of
the dream, can Wake you Up. I Am the Divine Conscious Light, the Real Divine Person—
Always Already Awake, Functioning Alive. I Appear in bodily (human) Form, within the dream of
life—not in order to console you, but to Awaken you through the Real crisis in consciousness. I
am a frustration to the unconscious condition of the dream.
I Am the Man of "Radical" Understanding. In My Function as the True Divine Guru, I Am
the Divine Awakener. I Am the Person of Reality Itself.
I Am Always Already Awake. I could not care less about your urges and demands within
the dream. I refuse to satisfy them. I refuse to give you an experience merely to console you. I
have no intention of satisfying anyone's egoic game. All the demands for satisfaction that you
bring are frustrated in My Company. What is satisfied, what is made to grow, is that fundamental
Intuition of Reality that is already the Foundation of your existence. That Intuition is intensified in
heart-Communion with Me. All the rest, the fascinated search, begins to fall away. In heartCommunion with Me, the search begins to reveal itself, until it becomes obvious.

Only the seeker takes the dilemma seriously. The waking state does not take your
dreams seriously. It is not the least concerned with your dreams. And, fortunately, all beings are
already alive with the Intuition of Reality. Therefore, all beings have an affinity with Sunlight, with
the True Waking State—with Me. Unqualified Reality, the Love-Bliss-Happiness of My "Bright"
Divine Self-Condition, is What they are already living—and that is What is consciously
discovered in the heart-relationship to Me. Because you Always Already Inhere in My LoveBliss-Happiness, I Draw you to Myself.
It is the Intuition of Reality Itself that inexorably draws people to Me, that leads them to
maintain themselves in My Divine Avataric Heart-Company. All apparent "reasons" for holding
on to Me fall away, and also all the apparent "reasons" for not holding on to Me. None of these reasons has any ultimate significance. It is your inherent affinity for Truth, your Intuition of the
Divine Self-Condition, of the Living Divine Heart Itself, that is entirely responsible for the practice
in My Divine Avataric Heart-Company.
When you become less concerned with your particular search, your inwardness, your
adventure, then you have simply become more sensitive to your Real Condition. You have felt
the sunlight falling on your sleeping eyes. When your eyes have opened in the morning light,
everything will be obvious to you—and you will know that you have never slept, that you have
never dreamed, that you have never been limited to any thing that has appeared. You have
never been limited to any condition that you have presumed. There was always only Reality
Itself, the True Divine Self-Nature of all-and-All—Which Is Love-Bliss-Happiness Itself,
Consciousness Itself, the Unqualified Presence of Reality Itself, Truth Itself, and Real (Acausal)
God.
I Am That.

In nineteen thirty-two an investigation was undertaken to determine the dynamic principle 
of existence in a workable form which might lead to the resolution of some of the problems of 
mankind. A long research in ancient and modern philosophy culminated, in nineteen thirty-eight, 
in the heuristically discovered primary law. A work was written at that time which embraced man 
and his activities. In the following years further research was undertaken in order to prove or 
disprove the axioms so established. 

Certain experiences during the war made it necessary for the writer to resolve the work 
into applicable equations and an intensive program was begun in nineteen forty-five toward this 
end. 


A year later many techniques had been discovered or evolved and a nebulous form of the 
present work was formulated. Financed chiefly by a lump sum disability compensation, that form 
of Dianetics was intensively applied to volunteer subjects, and the work gradually developed to its 
present form. 

Dianetics has been under test by the writer, as here delineated, for the past three years. 
The last series of random volunteers, numbering twenty, were rehabilitated, twenty out of twenty, 
with an average number of work hours of 151.2 per subject. Dianetics offers the first anatomy of 
the human mind and techniques for handling the hitherto unknown reactive mind, which causes 
irrational and psychosomatic behavior. It has successfully removed any compulsions, 
repressions, neuroses and psychoses to which it has been applied. 
PRIMARY AXIOMS 


Dianetics is an heuristic science built upon axioms. Workability rather than Idealism has 
been consulted. The only claim made for these axioms is that by their use certain definite and 
predictable results can be obtained. 

The principal achievement of Dianetics lies in its organization. Almost any of its parts can 
be found somewhere in history, even when they were independently evolved by the writer. There 
are no principal sources, and where a practice or a principle is borrowed from some past school 
the connection is usually accidental and does not admit any further use or validity of that school. 
Dianetics will work, and can only be worked, when regarded and used as a unity. When diluted 
by broader applications of older practices, it will no longer produce results. To avoid confusion 
and prevent semantic difficulties, new and simplified terminology has been used and is used only 
as defined herein. 

Dianetics is actually a family of sciences. It is here addressed in the form of a science of 
thought applicable to psychosomatic ills and individual aberrations. 

The field of thought may be divided into two areas which have been classified as the 
“knowable” and the “unknowable.” We are here concerned only with the “knowable.” In the 
“unknowable” we place that data which we do not need to know in order to solve the problem of 
improving or resolving aberrations of the human mind. By thus splitting the broad field of 
thought, we need not now concern ourselves with such indefinites as spiritualism, deism, 
telepathy, clairvoyance, or, for instance, the human soul. 

Conceiving this split as a line drawn through the area, we can assign a dynamic principle 
of existence to all that data remaining in the “knowable” field. 

After exhaustive research one word was selected as embracing the finite universe as a 
dynamic principle of existence. This word can be used as a guide or a measuring stick and by it 
can be evaluated much information. It is therefore our first and our controlling axiom. 

The first axiom is: 

SURVIVE! 

This can be seen to be the lowest common denominator of the finite universe. It embraces 
all forms of energy. It further delineates the purpose of that energy so far as it is now viewable by 
us in the “knowable” field. The activity of the finite universe can easily be seen to obey this axiom 
as though it were a command. All works and energies can be considered to be 

motivated by it. The various kingdoms have this as their lowest common denominator, 
for animals, vegetables and minerals are all striving for survival. We do not know to what end we 
are surviving, and in our field of the “knowable” and in our choice of only the workable axioms, 
we do not know and have no immediate reason to ask why. 

All forms of energy are then surviving to some unknown end, for some unknown 
purpose. We need only to know that they are surviving and that, as units or species, they must 
survive. 


By derivation from the first workable axiom, we come into possession of the second. In 
obedience to the command “survive,” life took on the form of a cell which, joining with other 
cells, formed a colony. The cell, by procreating, expanded the colony. The colony, by 


procreation, formed other colonies. Colonies of different types united and necessity, mutation and 
natural selection brought about specializing which increased the complexity of the colonies until 
they became an aggregation. The problems of the colonial aggregation were those of food, 
protection and procreation. In various ways a colonial aggregation of cells became a standardized 
unity and any advanced colonial aggregation came into possession by necessity, mutation and 
natural selection of a central control system . 

The purpose of the colonial aggregation was to survive. To do this it had to have food, 
means of defense, protection and means of procreation. The control center which had developed 
had as its primary command, Survive! Its prime purpose was the food, defense, protection and 
means of procreation. 

Thus can be stated the second workable axiom: 

THE PURPOSE OF THE MIND IS TO SOLVE PROBLEMS RELATING TO 
SURVIVAL. 

The ultimate success of the organism, its species or life would be, at its unimaginable 
extreme, immortality. The final failure in obedience to the law survive would be death. Between 
eternal survival and death lie innumerable gradations. In the middle ground of such a scale would 
be mere existence without hope of much success and without fear of failure. Below this point 
would lie, step by step, innumerable small errors, accidents, losses, each one of which would 
tend to abbreviate the chances of reaching the ultimate goal. Above this point would lie the small 
successes, appreciations, and triumphs which would tend to secure the desirable goal. 

As an axiom, the mind can then be said to act in obedience to a central basic command, 
survive, and to direct or manage the organism in its efforts to accomplish the ultimate goal for the 
individual or species or life, and to avoid for the individual or species or life any part of the final 
failure, which leads to the stated axiom: 

THE MIND DIRECTS THE ORGANISM, THE SPECIES, ITS SYMBIOTES OR LIFE 
IN THE EFFORT OF SURVIVAL. 

A study of the field of evolution will indicate that survival has been, will be, and is the 
sole test of an organism, whether the organism is treated in the form of daily activity or the life of 
the species. No action of the organism will be found to lie without the field of survival, for the 
organism is acting within its environment upon information received or recorded, and error or 
failure does not alter the fact that its basic impulse was motivated by survival. 

Another axiom may then be formulated as follows: 

THE MIND AS THE CENTRAL DIRECTION SYSTEM OF THE BODY, POSES, 
PERCEIVES AND RESOLVES PR OBLEMS OF SURVIVAL AND DIRECTS OR FAILS TO 
DIRECT THEIR EXECUTION. 

As there are many organisms in the same species, all attempting to accomplish the same 
end, and as there are many species, and as matter itself is attempting in one unit form or another to 
survive, there is necessarily conflict and contest amongst the individuals of the species, species, 
or units of matter. Species cannot survive without being interested primarily in the species. 
Natural selection and other causes have established this as a primary rule for survival: That the 
unit remain alive as long as possible as a unit and, by association and procreation, that the species 
remain alive as a species. Second grade interest is paid by the unit or the species to its symbiotes. 
Third grade interest is paid to inanimate matter. As this is apparently the most workable solution, 



natural selection best preserves those species which follow this working rule. And the symbiotes 
of the successful species therefore have enhanced opportunity for survival. 


Man is the most successful organism currently in existence, at least on this planet. Man is 
currently winning in the perpetual cosmic election which possibly may select the thinker of the 
new THOUGHT. 

Man is heir to the experience and construction of his own ancestors. As cellular 
conservatism is one of the factors of survival, his brain is basically the same brain which directed 
and resolved the problems of his animal forebears. By evolution and natural selection, this brain 
therefore has the primary priority in emergencies. Superimposed on this animal brain has been 
developed an enormously complex analyzer, which probably exists in his frontal lobe. 

The command, survive, is variable in individuals and species to the extent that it may be 
strong or weak. Superior strength of the command in the individual or species is normally, but 
variably, a survival factor. The primary facet of personality is the basic strength of the DYNAMIC 
drive. 


The DYNAMIC is variable from individual to individual and race to race. It is varied by 
physiology, environment, and experience. Its manifestation in the animal brain affects the tenacity 
of the individual to life or purpose, and it affects the activity of the analyzer. The first 
characteristic of the individual which should be considered is the basic strength of his 
DYNAMIC. By this an axiom can be formulated: 

THE PERSISTENCY OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN LIFE IS DIRECTS Y GO KERNED 
B Y THE STRENGTH OF HIS BASIC DYNAMIC. 

The analytical, human or, as it has elsewhere been called erroneously, the conscious 
mind, is variable from individual to individual and race to race in its ability to perceive and resolve 
problems. Another axiom can then be formulated: 

INTELLIGENCE IS THE ABILITY OF AN INDIVIDUAL, GROUP, OR RACE TO 
RESOLVE PROBLEMS RELATING TO SURVIVAL. 

It should be noted that there is a distinct difference between the DYNAMIC and the 
intelligence. High intelligence may not denote high DYNAMIC. High DYNAMIC may not denote 
high intelligence. Intelligence is mental sensitivity and analytical ability. DYNAMIC is the 
persistency of the individual in obedience to the command, survive! 

It has been noted that there is a gradation in the scale of survival. Gains toward the 
ultimate goal are pleasurable. Failures toward the final defeat are sorrowful or painful. Pleasure is 
therefore the perception of wellbeing, or an advance toward the ultimate goal. Pain, therefore, is 
the perception of a reduction toward the final defeat. Both are necessary survival factors. 

For the purpose of Dianetics, good and evil must be defined. Those things which may be 
classified as good by an individual are only those things which aid himself, his family, his group, 
his race, mankind or life in its dynamic obedience to the command, modified by the observations 
of the individual, his family, his group, his race, or life. 

As evil may be classified those things which tend to limit the dynamic thrust of the 
individual, his family, his group, his race, or life in general in the dynamic drive, also limited by 
the observation, the observer and his ability to observe. 


4 



Good may be defined as constructive. Evil may be defined as destructive — definitions 
modified by viewpoint. The individual man is an organism attempting to survive in affinity or 
contest with other men, races, and the three kingdoms. His goal is survival for himself, his 
progeny, his group, his race, his symbiotes, life and the universe in general in contest with any 
efforts or entities which threaten or impede his efforts to attain the goal. 

His happiness depends upon making, consolidating, or contemplating gains toward his 

goal. 

It is a purpose of Dianetics to pass man across the abyss of irrational, solely reactive 
thought and enter him upon a new stage of constructive progression to the ultimate goal. 


5 



AN ANALOGY OF THE MIND 


It is not the purpose of Dianetics to reconstruct the human mind. The purpose of 
Dianetics is to delete from the existing mind those physically painful experiences which have 
resulted in the aberration of the analytical mind, to resolve the physical manifestations of mental 
aberration, and to restore in its entirety the proper working function of a brain not otherwise 
physically deranged. Dianetics thus embraces the various aspects of psychosomatic conditions, 
including the glandular balance or imbalance of the organism, as influenced by painful physical 
experience. However, its purpose is not one of healing, and its address is not to such psycho- 
somatic manifestations specifically, but rather to those aberrative experiences in which these 
conditions have their roots. 

The initial adjustments of the individual are included in Child Dianetics and Educational 
Dianetics. Judicial Dianetics, Political Dianetics and Military Dianetics are elsewhere touched upon 
or allocated for study. Dianetics, as a family of sciences, proceeds however from the axioms 
cursorily touched upon in the last chapter and is uniformly governed by the principles of the 
behavior of the human mind. 

When an individual is acting contrary to survival of himself, his group, progeny, race, 
mankind, or life he can be considered to be unintelligent, uninformed or aberrated. Every single 
instance of aberrated conduct threatening the general goal of the individual as outlined in the last 
chapter can be proven to have a source which will specifically be found to be a painful experience 
containing data not available to the analytical mind. Every single instance and facet of aberrated 
conduct has its exact causation in the physically painful error which has been introduced during a 
moment of absence of the analytical power. 

Dianetics consists of discovering the aberration in the individual, finding the physically 
painful experience which corresponds to it and placing the data therein contained at the disposal of 
the analytical mind. More as an effort to demonstrate how that is accomplished than as an actual 
outline of the character of the mind, the following analogy is offered. 

First there is the physio-animal section of the brain, containing the motor controls, the 
sub-brains, and the physical nervous system in general, including the physical aspect of the 
analytical section of the brain. The control of all voluntary and involuntary muscles is contained in 
this section. It commands all body fluids, blood flow, respiration, glandular secretion, cellular 
construction, and the activity of various parts of the body. Experimentation has adequately 
demonstrated this. The physio-animal mind has specific methods of “thinking.” These are entirely 
reactive. Animal experimentation — rats, dogs, etc. — is experimentation on and with precisely this 
mind and little more. It is a fully conscious mind and should never be denoted by any term which 
denies it “consciousness” since there is no period in the life of the organism from conception to 
death when this mind is not awake, observing, and recording perceptics. This is the mind of a 
dog, cat, or rat and is also the basic mind of a man so far as its operating characteristics are 
concerned. A man in the deepest possible somnambulistic sleep is still in possession of more 
mind and thinking and coordinating ability than a lower animal. 

The term “consciousness” is no more than a designation of the awareness of now. The 
physio-animal mind never ceases to be aware of now and never ceases to record the successive 
instances of now which in their composite make up a time track connecting memory in an orderly 
chain. Cessation of life alone discontinues the recording of perceptions on this orderly track. 
Unconsciousness is a condition wherein the organism is discoordinated only in its analytical 
process and motor control direction. In the physio-animal section of the brain, a complete time 
track and a complete memory record of all perceptions for all moments of the organism’s 
existence is available. 




As life progresses, for instance, from a blade of grass, greater and greater complexities 
and degrees of selfdeterminism are possible. Energy in its various forms is the primary motivator 
in the lower orders, but as the complexity of the order is increased into the animal kingdom, the 
physio-animal brain attains more and more command of the entire organism until it itself begins to 
possess the second section of the mind. 

All animals possess in some slight degree an analyzer. This, which we designate the 
analytical mind, is present even in lower orders, since it is only that section of the brain which 
possesses the self-deterministic coordinative command of the physio-animal brain and thus of the 
body. In a rat, for instance, it is no more than its “conscious” awareness of now applying to 
lessons of then without rationality but with instinct and painful experience. This is the analytical 
section of the mind in a lower animal but it is the reactive mind in a man whose analytical mind is 
so highly attuned and intricate that it can command entirely the physio-animal brain and thus the 
body. 


Man not only possesses a superior physio-animal mind but possesses as well an 
analytical mind of such power and complexity that it has no real rival in any other species. The 
analytical mind of man cannot be studied by observing the reactions of animals under any situa- 
tions. Not only is it more sensitive but it possesses factors and sensitivities not elsewhere found. 

Continuing this analogy: Lying between the analytical mind and the physio-animal mind 
may be conceived the reactive mind. This is the coordinated responses of the physio-animal mind, 
the “analytical” mind of animals, and the first post of emergency command in man. All errors of a 
psychic or psychosomatic nature can be considered for the purposes of this analogy to lie in the 
reactive mind. The first human analytical mind took command of the body and physio-animal 
mind under strained and dangerous circumstances when man was still in violent contest with other 
species around him. It can be considered that the analytical mind received command with the 
single proviso that instantaneous emergency would be handled by the outdated but faster reactive 
mind. 


Any and all errors in thinking and action derive from the reactive mind as it is increased in 
strength and power by painful experience. It can be called a shadow mind, instantaneously 
reactive when any of its content is perceived in the environment of the individual, at which time it 
urgently bypasses the analytical mind and causes immediate reaction in the physio-animal mind 
and in the body. Additionally, the reactive mind is in continual presence when chronically 
restimulated by a constantly present restimulator — which is to say, an approximation of the 
reactive mind’s content or some part thereof continually perceived in the environment of the orga- 
nism. The reactive mind is in action so long as it is activated by an exact or nearly exact 
approximation of its content. But given too continuous a restimulation, it can and does derange 
both the physio-animal mind and body below it and the analytical mind above it. It was created by 
deranging circumstances of a physical nature, hence it deranges. 

The entire content of the reactive mind is records of physical pain with its accompanying 
perceptions during disconnection of the analyzer. All aberrated conduct and error on the part of an 
individual is occasioned by restimulation of his reactive mind. 

None of these minds are “unconscious,” nor are they subconscious. The entire organism 
is always conscious but the temporary dispersion of the thought processes of the analytical mind 
brings about a condition whereby that mind, having been dispersed and considering itself the 
residence of the person, is unable to obtain and reach data perceived and received by the organism 
during the analytical mind’s condition of dispersion. That the analytical mind can be thrown, by 
pain or shock, out of circuit is a survival factor of its own: as sensitive “machinery” it must be 
protected by a fuse system. 


7 



THE DYNAMICS 


The basic dynamic, SURVIVE, increases in complexity as the complexity of the 
organism evolves. Energy may be considered to have taken many paths through eternity to arrive 
intact at the infinite goal. The “why” of the goal may lie above the finite line but below it, 
demarked by the word SURVIVE, definite manifestations are visible. Energy collects into various 
forms of matter which collect and aggregate in various materials and compounds. Life evolves 
from the simplest basic into complex forms since evolutionary change is in itself a method of 
survival. 

Conflict amongst species and individuals within the species is additionally a survival 
factor. Affinity of individuals for groups, races, and the whole of its species, and for other 
species, is additionally a survival factor, as strong or stronger than conflict. 

Drive is defined as the dynamic thrust through time toward the attainment of the goal. 
Survive is considered to be the lowest common denominator of all energy efforts and all forms. It 
can then be subdivided specifically into several drive lines as applicable to each form or species. 
The unaberrated self contains eight main drives which are held in common with man. 

The dynamics are: One, self; Two, sex; Three, group; Four, mankind; Five, life; Six, the 
physical universe; Seven, thought; Eight, universal thought or infinity. 

An entire philosophy can be built around each one of these dynamics which will account 
for all the actions of an individual. Any one of these philosophies is so complete that it can be 
logically made to include the other seven. In other words, all purpose of an individual can be 
rationalized into the dynamic of self. A philosophy exists which attempts to rationalize everything 
into the sexual dynamic, and so on with all the dynamics. Observing that each one can stand as a 
logical unity, one finds it necessary to retire to the lowest common denominator of the basic 
dynamic which actually does explain the eight subdivisions. As each one of the subdivisions is 
capable of supporting the whole weight of a rational argument, it can readily be deduced that each 
is of nearly equal importance in the individual. The aberrated conditions of a society tend to vary 
the stress on these dynamics, making first one and then another the keynote of the society. 

In an unaberrated individual or society, the validity of all eight would be recognized. 

The unaberrated individual may physiologically possess or environmentally stress one or 
more of these dynamics above the others. In terms of basic personality, the 
physiological-environmental-educational aspect of the individual is of varied strength in the eight 
dynamics. 

Each one of the eight dynamics breaks further into purposes which are specific and 
complex. Purposes and other factors entangle these dynamics, and varying situations and the 
observational power of the individual may conflict one of these dynamics against another within 
the individual himself. This is a basic complex factor of unaberrated personality. 

I. THE DYNAMIC OF SELF consists of the dynamic thrust to survive as an individual, 
to obtain pleasure as an individual, and to avoid pain. It covers the general field of food, clothing 
and shelter, personal ambition, and general individual purpose. 

II. THE DYNAMIC OF SEX embraces the procreation of progeny, the care of that 
progeny, and the securing for that progeny of better survival conditions and abilities in the future. 


8 



III. THE DYNAMIC OF GROUP embraces the various units of the species man, such as 
the association, the military company, the people in the surrounding countryside, the nation and 
the race. It is characterized by activity on the part of the individual to obtain and maintain the 
survival of the group of which he is a part. 

IV. THE MANKIND DYNAMIC embraces the survival of the species. 

Note: The first four dynamics belong to Dianetics. The upper four, introduced late 1950, 
complete the full eight dynamics of Scien to logy . 

V. THE DYNAMIC OF LIFE is the urge of the individual to survive for life and for life 
to survive for itself. 

VI. THE PHYSICAL UNIVERSE DYNAMIC is the drive of the individual to enhance 
the survival of all matter, energy, time and space. 

VII. THE THOUGHT DYNAMIC concerns the urge of the individual to survive as 

thought. 


VIII. THE DYNAMIC OF UNIVERSAL THOUGHT is the urge of the individual to 
survive for the Creator. 

While man is concerned with any one of the above dynamics, any one of them may 
become antipathetic to his own survival. This is rational conflict and is normally and commonly 
incidental to survival. It is non-aberrative in that it is rational within the educational limitation. 

The family as a unit is not a dynamic but a combination of dynamics. And in this and 
other societies it attains a position of interest which is not necessarily inherent in the individual or 
group. 


Basically simple, complexity is introduced amongst the dynamics by individual and 
group irrationalities. The basic (unaberrated) individual has continual difficulty rationalizing the 
problems of importances and choices amongst these dynamics. When the basic individual 
becomes aberrated and is attendantly unable to reason freely on all problems, a selection of 
importances amongst these dynamics becomes nearly impossible and produces aberrated solutions 
which may resolve such an extreme as the destruction of the individual himself, by himself, under 
the mistaken solution that he may thus obey the primary command. 

Note: All self-destructive effort is irrationality of a precise nature which will often be 
found by the auditor in his preclear4 during auditingS but which forms no part of the basic 
personality of that individual. 

4 preclear: this term covers anyone who is not CLEAR; however, it is principally used to 
describe a person who, through auditing, is finding out more about himself and life. 

5 auditing: the application of Dianetic procedures to a preclear by a trained Dianetic 

auditor. 


9 



.c.THE BASIC INDIVIDUAL 


For the purposes of this work the terms basic individ ual and Clear are nearly 
synonymous since they denote the unaberrated self in complete integration and in a state of 
highest possible rationality; a CIear6 is one who has become the basic individual through auditing. 

The precise personality of the basic individual is of interest to the auditor. His complete 
characteristic is established by: 1. The strength of his basic DYNAMIC; 2. The relative strengths 
of his dynamics; 3. The sensitivity, which is to say the intelligence, of his analyzer; 4. The 
coordination of his motor controls; 5. His physiological and glandular condition; 6. His 
environment and education. 

The experiences of each individual also create an individual composite and so may 
additionally designate individuality. There are as many distinct individuals on earth as there are 
men, women and children. That we can establish a common denominator of drive and basic 
function does not, cannot, and will not alter the fact that individuals are amazingly varied one 
from the next. 

It will be found by experience and exhaustive research, as it has been clinically 
established, that the basic individual is invariably responsive in all the dynamics and is essentially 
“good.” There are varying degrees of courage but in the basic individual there is no pusillanimity. 
The virtues of the basic individual are innumerable. His intentional vices and destructive 
dramatizations are non-existent. He is in close alignment with that ideal which mankind 
recognizes as an ideal. This is a necessary part of an auditor’s working knowledge, since 
deviations from it denote the existence of aberration, and such departures are unnatural and 
enforced and are no part of the self-determinism of the individual. 

Man is not a reactive animal. He is capable of self-determinism. He has will power. He 
ordinarily has high analytical ability. He is rational and he is happy and integrated only when he is 
his own basic personality. 

The most desirable state in an individual is complete self-determinism. Such 
self-determinism may be altered and shaped to some degree by education and environment, but so 
long as the individual is not aberrated, he is in possession of self-determinism. So long as he is 
self-determined in his actions he adjusts himself successfully to the degree that his environment 
will permit such an adjustment. He will be more forceful, effective and happier in that 
environment than when aberrated. 

That the basic personality is “good” does not mean that he cannot be a terribly effective 
enemy of those things rationally recognizable as destructive to himself and to his. 

The basic individual is not a buried unknown or a different person, but an intensity of all 
that is best and most able in the person. The basic individual equals the same person minus his 
pain and dramatizations. 

The drive strength of the person does not derive from his aberrations. The aberrations 
lessen the drive strength. Artistry, personal force, personality, all are residual in the basic 
personality. This is derived from clinical research and experimentation. The only reason an 
aberree occasionally holds hard to his aberrations is due to the fact that his engrams have a content 
which forbids their removal. 

The reactive mind consists of a collection of experiences received during an unanalytical 
moment which contain pain and actual or conceived antagonism to the survival of the individual. 


10 



An engram is a perceptic entity which can be precisely defined. The aggregate of engrams 
compose the reactive mind. 

A new sub-field entitled “Perceptics” has been originated here to define adequately 
engramic data. Perceptics contains as one of its facets the field of semantics. Precisely as the field 
of semantics is organized so is organized in perceptics each sensory perception. 

The audio-syllabic communication system of man has its counterpart in various languages 
observable in lower animals. Words are sounds in syllabic form delivered with a definite timbre, 
pitch, and volume or sight recognition in each case. Words are a highly specialized form of 
audio-perceptics. The quality of the sound in uttering the word is nearly as important as the word 
itself. The written word belongs in part to visioperceptics. Having but lately acquired his 
extensive vocabulary, the mind of man is least adjusted to words and their sense. The mind is 
better able to differentiate amongst qualities of utterance than amongst the meanings of words 
themselves. 

Included in perceptics in the same fashion and on the same axioms as semantics are the 
other sensory perceptions — organic sensation, the tactile sense, the olfactory sense and the senses 
involved with sight and hearing. Each has its own grouping. And each carries its class of 
messages with highly complex meanings. Each one of these divisions of the senses is plotted in 
time according to the earliest or most forceful significances. Each class of messages is so filed as 
to lead the individual toward pleasure and away from pain. The classifications and study of this 
varied sensory file has been designated “Perceptics.” 

Engrams are received into the mind forming a reactive area during moments of lowered 
analytical awareness of the individual, and they contain physical pain and antagonism to survival. 
The engram is a packaged perceptic not available to the analytical mind but intimately connected to 
the physio-animal mind. Under normal conditions it reacts as a dramatization of itself when 
approximated by the organism’ s perceptions of its content in the immediate environment during 
periods of weariness, illness, or hypnotic moments in the life of the individual. 

When injury or illness supplants the analytical mind producing what is commonly known 
as “unconsciousness” and when physical pain and antagonism to the survival of the organism are 
present, an engram is received by the individual. Subsequently, during moments when the 
potential of the analytical mind is reduced by weariness, illness or similar circumstances, one or 
more of the perceptics contained in the engram may be observed by the individual in his 
environment, and without his perceiving that he has observed it (or the identity of it) the 
individual dramatizes the moment of receipt of the engram. 

An engram impedes one or more dynamics of the basic individual. Being antagonistic to 
his survival it can be considered analogically to consist of a reverse charge. 

As an example, the analytical mind can be said to possess multiple scanners in layers. 
Ordinary or pleasurable memory can be considered to have, as an analogy only, a positive charge. 
The multiple scanners are able to sweep these areas and make available memory data to the 
analytical mind so that it can arrive by various mathematical means at a solution for its various 
problems. 

The engram, as a specific memory package, can be considered to have a reverse charge 
which cannot be reached by the scanner of the analytical mind but which is directly connected to 
the motor controls and other physical functions and which can exert, at a depth not nearly as basic 
as the basic drive but nevertheless low, a hidden influence upon the analytical mind through 
another circuit. The analytical mind in awareness of now, nevertheless, is unable to discover, 


11 



without assistance from an auditor, the existence of such an impediment since it was received 
during a moment of extremely low potential on the part of the analytical mind. 

As a further analogy, and for demonstration only, an engram can be considered to be a 
bundle of perceptions of a precise nature. An engram is an entire dramatic sequence, implanted 
during unconsciousness, which possesses specific perceptic keys, any one of which, when 
unanalytically perceived by the individual in his environment, may in greater or lesser degrees set 
the engram into reaction. 

Denied to the analytical mind at its reception, it is denied to the analytical mind in its exact 
character during its dramatization. Its content is literal and, on the physio-animal level, demands 
action. Man’s analytical ability and his vocabulary are imposed above both the physio-animal 
mind and the reactive mind, both on the evolutionary time track and in awareness. The charge 
contained in the engram is inexhaustible and remains reactive in full force whenever keyed into the 
circuit by restimulators. 

Restimulators are those approximations in the environment of an individual of the content 
of an engram. Restimulators can exist in any of the various senses. The orderly filing of 
perceptics in the memory does not, apparently, include the content of engrams, these being filed 
separately under an “immediate danger” heading. 

There are three kinds of thought: the first is engramic, or literal. It demands immediate 
action without examination by the analytical mind. A hand being withdrawn from a hot stove 
when burned is being governed by the reactive principle, but as the ensuing instant of 
unconsciousness caused by the shock is ordinarily slight, no real engram can be said to have 
formed. 


The second type of thought is justified thought. Engramic thought is literal, without 
reason, irrational. Justified thought is the attempt of the analytical mind to explain the reactive, 
engramic reactions of the organism in the ordinary course of living. Every engram may cause 
some form of aberrated conduct on the part of the individual. Justified thought is the effort of the 
conscious mind to explain away that aberration without admitting, as it cannot do normally, that it 
has failed the organism. 

The third and optimum type of thought is rational thought. This is the thought used by a 

“Clear.” 


An engram is an apparent surcharge in the mental circuit with certain definite finite 
content. That charge is not reached or examined by the analytical mind but that charge is capable 
of acting as an independent command. 

When the basic drive of the individual is boosted in potential by an observed necessity, 
the residual charge in an engram is insufficient to contest, at times, the raised purpose. The 
analytical mind can then be seen to function in entire command of the organism without serious 
modification by engramic command. 

At other times, hostility in the environment and confusion of the analytical mind combine 
to reduce the dynamic potential to such a degree that the engramic command, in comparison to the 
basic drive, can be seen to be extremely powerful. It is at such times, in the presence of even faint 
restimulators, that the individual most demonstrates his aberrations. 

EXAMPLE: Engram received at the age of three and one-half years. Adult preclear. As 
child in dental chair, against his will, under antagonistic conditions, given nitrous oxide and 


12 



tricked by dentist. During painful portion of treatment the dentist says, “He is asleep. He can’t 
hear, feel or see anything. Stay there.” 

The perceptics which can be restimulated in this are the quality, pitch and volume of the 
dentist’s voice; the sound of the dentist’s drill; the slap of the cable running the drill; street noises 
of a specific kind; the tactile of the mouth being forcibly held open; the smell of the mask; the 
sound of running water; the smell of nitrous oxide; and in short, several of each perceptic class, 
excluding only sight. 

The effect of this experience, being a part of an engramic chain which contained two 
earlier experiences, was in some small degree to trance the individual and maintain some portion 
of him in a regressed state. 

This engram is too brief and extraordinarily simple but it will serve as an example to the 
auditor. The timeless quality of the suggestions, the conceived antagonism, precursors9 on the 
engramic chain awakened and re-enforced, all these things confused the time sense of the 
individual and were otherwise reactive in later life. 

For every engram there is a somatic as part of that engram. No aberration exists without 
its somatics unless it is a racial-educational aberration, in which instance it is compatible with its 
environment and so is not considered irrational. 

Every aberration contains its exact command in some engram. 

The numbers of engrams per individual are relatively few. The aberrated condition of the 
individual does not depend on the number of engrams but the severity of individual engrams. 

An engram is severe in the exact ratio that it is conceived by the organism to have been a 
moment of threat to survival. The character of the threat and the perceptic content produce the 
aberration. A number of engrams with similar perceptics in an individual produce a complex 
aberration pattern which nevertheless has for its parts individual engrams. 

An aberration is the manifestation of an engram and is serious only when it influences the 
competence of the individual in his environment. 

Engrams are of two types depending upon the duration of restimulation. There are 
“floaters” and “chronics.” A floater has not been restimulated in the individual during the lifetime 
succeeding it. A chronic is an engram which has been more or less continuously restimulated so 
that it has become an apparent portion of the individual. A chronic begins to gather “locks.” A 
floater has not accumulated locks since it has never been restimulated. 

A lock can be conceived to be joined to an engram in such a way that it can be reached by 
the multiple scanners of the analytical mind which cannot reach the engram. A lock is a painful 
mental experience. It is or is not regarded by the analytical mind as a source of difficulty or 
aberration. It is a period of mental anguish and is wholly dependent upon an engram for its pain 
value. When an engram is activated into a chronic, it accumulates numerous locks along the time 
track of the individual. The engram itself is not immediately locatable, except somatically, along 
the time track of the individual. Locks are of some diagnostic value but, as they exist as 
experiences more or less recallable by the analytical mind, they can be depended upon to vanish 
upon the removal of the engram from the reactive mind. 

The running of a lock as a lock has some value but the exhaustion of locks from an 
aberrated individual is long and arduous and is seldom productive of any lasting result. Upon the 
location and exhaustion of the engram from the reactive mind, all of its locks vanish. An engram 


13 



may exist unactivated as a floater for any number of years or for the entire duration of an indi- 
vidual’ s life. At any future moment after the receipt of an engram, whether that time period 
consists of days or decades, the floater may reactivate at which time it becomes part of the 
command obeyed by the analytical mind in its efforts to rationalize. The removal of the individual 
from his restimulators, which is to say, the environment in which the engram was reactive, is in 
itself a form of therapy, since the engram may then return to its status as a floater. 

EXAMPLE: Engram — At birth occurs the phrase, “No good,” uttered during a moment 
of headache and gasping on the part of a child. 

Lock: At the age of seven while the child was ill with a minor malady, the mother in a fit 
of rage said that he was “no good.” 

The removal of the engram also removes, ordinarily without further attention, the lock. 

Note: Birth remained inactive in the above case as a floater until the moment of reduced 
analytical power at the age of seven when a birth phrase was repeated. It is worth remarking that 
the entire content of the birth engram is given simultaneously both to the child and to the mother, 
with only the difference of somatics. It is further worthy of note that the mother quite often 
perceives in the child a restimulator and uses against it the phrases which were said when the child 
gave the mother the greatest pain, namely, birth. The child is then victimized into various 
psychosomatic ills by the repetition of its birth engram restimulators, which may develop even 
more seriously into actual disease. 

The brain controls the multiple and complex functions of the growth and condition of the 
organism. Containing organic sensation as one of its perceptics, the engram then, when 
reactivated, causes a somatic and additionally may deny body fluids, i.e. hormones and blood, to 
some portion of the anatomy, occasioning psychosomatic ills. The denial of fluid or adequate 
blood supply may result in a potentially infective area. The psychosomatic reduces the resistance 
of some portion of the body to actual disease. 

Somatic and other sensory errors find their basis in unconscious antagonistic moments. A 
somatic may be adjusted by an address to a lock but. the permanency of adjustment obtains only 
until such time as the engram is again reactivated, causing another lock. 

All aberrations are occasioned by engrams. 

An engram is severely painful or severely threatening to the survival of the organism and 
is an engram only if it cannot be reached by the awake analytical mind. 

A simple approximation of the action of an engram can be accomplished by an experiment 
in hypnotism whereby a positive suggestion which contains a posthypnotic signal is delivered to 
an amnesia-tranced person. The subject, having been commanded to forget the suggestion when 
awake, will then perform the act. This suggestion is then actually a light portion of the reactive 
mind. It is literally interpreted, unquestionably followed, since it is received during a period of 
unawareness of the analytical mind or some portion of it. The restimulator, which may be the act 
of the operator adjusting his tie, causes the subject to commit some act. The subject will then try 
to explain why he is doing what he is doing, no matter how illogical that action may be. The 
post-hypnotic suggestion is then recalled to the subject’s mind and he remembers it. The 
compulsion vanishes (unless it is laid upon an actual engram). 

The obedience of the subject to the command has, as its source, engramic thought. The 
explanation by the subject for his own action is the analytical mind observing the organism, which 


14 



it supposes is in its sole charge, and justifying itself. The release of the post-hypnotic suggestion 
into the analytical mind brings about rational thought. 

Engrams can be considered to be painfully inflicted, often timeless, post-hypnotic 
suggestions delivered antagonistically to the “unconscious” subject. The posthypnotic suggestion 
given the subject in the above example would not have any permanent effect on the subject even if 
it were not removed by the operator, because there was presumed to be no antagonism involved 
(unless, of course, it rested on a former engram). 

The physio-animal mind of an organism never ceases recording on some level. The exact 
moment when recording begins in an organism has not at this date been accurately determined. It 
has been found to be very early, probably earlier than four months after conception and five 
months before birth. In the presence of pain, any moment prior to the age of two years may be 
considered to be unanalytical. Any painful experience received by the foetus contains its full 
perceptic package, including darkness. 

Once an auditor has worked a prenatal engram and has seen its influence upon the 
engramic chain and the awake life of the adult, no question will remain in his 

mind concerning the actuality of the experience. That the foetus does record is attributable 
to a phenomenon of the extension of perceptions during moments of pain and the absence of the 
analytical mind. 

Laboratory experiment demonstrates that under hypnosis an individual’s sensory 
perception may be artificially extended. 

The existence of pain in any large degree is sufficient to extend the hearing of the foetus 
so that it records, during the existence of pain and the presence of exterior sound, the entire and 
complete record of the experience. As a chronic engram is but precariously fixed on the mind, the 
syllables or voice timbres contained in the prenatal will reactivate the somatic and the emotional 
engramic content whenever the approximations of that engram appear in the child’s (or the 
adult’s) vicinity. 

The understanding of language is not necessary to reactivate an engram since the 
recording of the brain is so precise that the utterance of the identical words in similar tones during 
later prenatal periods or during birth, or immediately after birth, can and may occasion the original 
prenatal or any of the prenatals to become reactive, producing locks, injuring the health of the 
infant or, for that matter, of the foetus. 

The perceptics of the foetus are extended only during moments of pain. But a chain of 
prenatal engrams can occasion a condition wherein the hearing of the foetus is chronically 
extended, forming numerous locks before birth. These locks will vanish when the actual engrams 
are discovered and exhausted from the psyched. 

Any painful unanalytical moment containing antagonism is not only a matter of record but 
a source of potential action in the human organism at any period during its lifetime, reserving, of 
course, the question of when the foetus first begins to record. 

Birth is ordinarily a severely painful unconscious experience. It is ordinarily an engram 
of some magnitude. Anyone who has been born then possesses at least one engram. Any period 
of absence of analytical power during receipt of physical pain has some engramic potentiality. 


15 



Moments when the analytical power is present in some quantity, when physical pain is 
absent and only antagonism to the organism is present do not form engrams and are not 
responsible for the aberration of the individual. 

Sociological maladjustments; parental punishments of a minor sort, even when they 
include pain; libidos; childhood struggles and jealousies are not capable of aberrating the 
individual. These can influence the personality and environmental adjustment of the individual but 
so long as he is not pathologically incompetent, he can and will resolve these problems and 
remain without aberration. 

The human mind is an enormously powerful organism and its analytical ability is great. It 
is not overlaid above naturally unsocial or evil desires, but is founded upon powerful and 
constructive basics which only powerful, painful and antagonistic experiences can impede. 
Engrams will be found to have been conceived by the individual as intensely antagonistic to the 
survival of the organism. 

The discovery of the basic engram is the first problem of the auditor. It normally results 
in an engramic chain. The content of that chain will be found to be physically severe. 

An engram is physically painful, is conceived by the organism as an antagonistic threat to 
its survival, and is received during the absence of the analytical power of the mind. These factors 
may vary within the engram so that an engram may be of minimal pain, maximal antagonism and 
minimal absence of the analytical power. 

NOTE: ONE HAS AS MUCH FUNCTIONING ANALYZER AS ONE HAS 
AWARENESS OF NO W. 

The body is to some degree reliving the experience of the engram whenever the 
experience is restimulated. A chronic psychosomatic, such as a painful arm, indicates the chronic, 
continuous coexistence with NOW of the moment the arm was broken or hurt. Several engrams 
reactivated into a chronic state bring several moments of unconsciousness, pain, and antagonism 
into a coexistence with NO W. The engram is a bundle of perceptics which include, as the primary 
manifestation, organic sensation. The organic sensation is enforced on the members of the body 
to a greater or lesser degree whenever, and as long as, the engram is restimulated. There is only 
one psychosomatic command which is common to all engrams. Any engram contains this as part 
of the command it will enforce upon the body. As a stomach may be made to ache chronically 
(ulcers), to feel broken, the engram also enforces a command upon the organ of the analytical 
mind. That command is common to every engram. Engrams are valid only when they are received 
during a momentary dispersal or shocked, null condition of the analytical mind. Every engram 
contains and enforces the command on the analytical mind that it has been dispersed and is not 
operating. This is common to every engram. This is reduction of the intellect by engrams totally 
aside from specific engramic content. It explains at once insanity and also the remarkable mental 
facility of a cleared or released individual. 


16 



.c. ABERRATIONS 


All aberrations of any kind are of precisely the same nature (as covered in the last 
chapter). It is the content of the engram which causes the aberration and forms its nature. 
Complexity amongst engramic contents may demonstrate a most complex aberration. 

The various commands contained in the engrams, reactivating and modifying the basic 
dynamic command of the mind, produce abnormal characteristics in the behavior of the analytical 
mind, which are chronic or sporadic as the engrams occasioning them are restimulated. An entire 
concept of existence may be built from engramic content. Conflicts in the commands contained in 
engrams and conflicts between the basic drive and the engramic contents combine into behavior 
patterns. 

When the organism has become so impeded that it can no longer influence or command 
its environment, it can be considered to be insane in that environment. Change of environment 
may relieve the condition or, more certainly, the exhaustion of the content of the reactive mind 
will restore the ability of the analytical mind to solve the problems with which it is confronted. 

Whatever the engramic content of the reactive mind and its potential influence upon the 
behavior of the individual, it does not necessarily follow that the reactive mind need be chronically 
restimulated. However, when the reactive mind has been restimulated consistently, the analytical 
mind, called upon to solve the problems around and through antagonistic and incorrect data, may 
be unable to perform its task. In the absence of disease or injury, any mind not in a physiological 
amnesia state may be restored to normal function by the removal of the reactive mind. It should be 
noted however that this is modified by the fact that people who have received insulin shocks, 
prefrontal lobotomies, electric shocks and other treatments are regarded as equivocal and are 
temporarily classed with disease cases for lack of adequate observation in this stage of the 
experimental research. 

People can be regarded as rational or irrational only insofar as they react in their 
customary environment. But any person in possession of a reactive mind is an unknown quantity 
until that reactive mind has been examined. 

There are several factors contained in the engrams in the reactive mind which most 
certainly tend toward aberration. These include engramic commands which derange the time sense 
of the individual and thus apparently destroy his time track and engrams which contain 
restimulators of such timelessness and such perceptic content remain thereafter continually with 
the individual and seem to arrest him or regress him in time. Engrams containing commands 
which make the individual chronically unable to conceive differences are especially harmful since 
these tend to compare everything to engramic value and thus cause the individual to arrive at a 
chronic state of engramic thinking. 

The mind resolves problems related to survival, utilizing its ability to conceive similarities 
and obser\>e differences. 

Engrams which destroy or tend to hold in suspension the analytical mind’s ability to 
conceive associations most influence the apparent intelligence of the mind. But engrams which 
tend, by their command content, to destroy the mind’s ability to conceive differences may produce 
severe aberration. 

EXAMPLE: “All men are alike,” received as powerful engramic content would tend to 
compare and associate every man with those men contained in the reactive mind as painful and 
dangerous. 


17 



An aberration may attain any form of complexion. As a rough analogy: a compulsion may 
be conceived to be an engramic command that the organism must do something; a repression is a 
command that the organism must not do something; a neurosis is an emotional state containing 
conflicts and emotional data inhibiting the abilities or welfare of the individual; and a psychosis is 
a conflict of commands which seriously reduce the individual’s ability to solve his problems in his 
environment to a point where he cannot adjust some vital phase of his environmental needs. 

All this variety of manifestation of aberration is occasioned by the pain-enforced 
commands or contents of engrams. 

Physical aberrations are occasioned by engrams when they are not the result of injury or 
disease; even, then, the aspect may be improved by the exhaustion of the reactive mind of the sick 
individual. The engram cannot manifest itself as a mental aberration without also manifesting itself 
to some degree as somatic aberration. Removal of the somatic content of engrams which is also 
necessary to obtain any other relief, can and does occasion glandular readjustment, cellular 
inhibition and other physiological corrections. 


18 



.c.THE TONE SCALE 


The tone scale denotes numerically, first the status of an engram in the reactive mind, 
next its erasure or reduction, and provides a measure for sanity in an individual. 

The derivation of this scale is clinical and is based upon observation of engrams being 
worked. When an engram is located and developed, the extreme range it can follow begins with 
apathy, develops into anger (or the various facets of antagonism), proceeds into boredom, and 
arrives at last in cheerfulness or vanishes utterly. 

The tone scale is essentially an assignation of numerical value by which individuals can 
be numerically classified. It is not arbitrary but will be found to approximate some actual 
governing law in nature. 

Zero is equivalent to death. An individual with a zero tone would be dead. 

Ranging upwards from zero to one then is that emotional bracket which may be denoted 
as apathy along its graduated scale from death to the beginnings of apathetic resentment. 

From one to two is the range of antagonism, including suspicion, resentment, and anger. 

Boredom and its equivalents, by which is denoted minor annoyance, begin at two and 
end at three. 

From three to four are the emotions which range from carelessness to cheerfulness. 

The term tone four denotes a person who has achieved rationality and cheerfulness. 

Each engram residual in the reactive mind has its own independent tonal value. Serious 
engrams will be found in the apathy range. Dangerous engrams will be found in the anger range. 
Above two point five an engram could not be considered to have any great power to affect the 
analytical mind. Each engram in the reactive mind then can be said to possess a tone value. The 
composite sum of these engrams will give, if added, a numerical value to the reactive mind. 

Engrams can be computed as they lie along the dynamics, and to each dynamic may be 
assigned a tone. The sum of the tones of the dynamics, divided by the number of the dynamics, 
will give a potential numerical value for an individual. This, of course, is variable depending on 
the existence of restimulators in his environment to reactivate the engrams. 

The probable average of mankind at this writing may be in the vicinity of 3.0. Complete 
rationality depends upon exhaustion of the reactive mind and complete rationality is invariably the 
result of reaching tone four. 

The initial diagnosis is done by the assignation of a general tone to denote the condition 
of an individual’s reactive mind. His methods of meeting life, his emotional reaction to the 
problems in his environment, can be evaluated by the use of the tone scale. 

In auditing, as will be covered later, an engram normally can be expected to run from its 
initial value in the apathy or anger range to tone four. Very shortly after it reaches tone four it 
should vanish. If it vanishes without attaining the laughter of tone four it can be assumed that the 
individual’s basic engram has not been erased. 

The tone scale has value in auditing and should be thoroughly understood. 


19 



.c.THE CHARACTER OF ENGRAMS 


There are several general types of engrams. It must be understood that the mind 
possesses a time track of one sort or another and that this track is a specific thing. The time track 
of an individual will include all those things available to his analytical mind when in a light trance 
or during regression. However, a person can be regressed and the data which he can easily 
contact along his time track is definitely not engramic even if it possesses an emotional charge. 
Everything on this track will be rational or justified experience. It will not include engrams. It may 
include locks — which is to say that it may include moments of mental anguish or antagonism and 
may even include instants of unconsciousness which have some slight engramic command value. 

An engram has several specific, positive characteristics. It is received by the individual at 
some moment of physical pain. It is not available to the analyzer and it includes conceived or 
actual antagonism to the survival of the organism. Certain mechanics such as “forget it” may 
swerve a minimumly painful or unconscious experience off the time track. In that case it becomes 
possessed of engramic command value. 

All engrams with power to derange the analytical mind and aberrate the physical body lie 
off the time track and are not available to the analytical mind. 

By reason of its disorganization during the moment the engram was received, or because 
it has been forcibly instructed that the data in the engram is not to be recalled, the analyzer cannot 
reach the engram by ordinary means because the data has been erroneously labelled “dangerous,” 
“important,” or “too painful to touch.” The engram then, by a bypass circuit, feeds hidden 
commands into the analyzer. By a direct instantaneous circuit it is permanently connected to the 
motor controls, all perceptic channels, the glands, and heart. It is awaiting a moment of low 
general tone, weariness, or injury when the analytical mind has reduced powers. It is also 
awaiting the perception of one or more of the engram’ s restimulators in the environment of the 
organism. 

Continuous restimulation of the engrams can, in itself, cause a low general tone which in 
its turn permits more engrams to become restimulated. As the reactive mind comes into a more or 
less completely chronic state of restimulation, the individual becomes more and more governed by 
this mind. His thought becomes more and more engramic and he can be seen to drop in general 
tone on the tone scale down to the break point which may be arbitrarily placed somewhere 
between 2 and 2.5 and below which lies the region of insanity. 

Engramic thought is irrational identity-thought by which the mind is made to conceive 
identities where only vague similarities may exist. It is necessary that the auditor thoroughly 
understand engramic thought, for it is with this complete irrationality of identity that he will 
basically deal. As he works with any preclear, he must continually employ in the bulk of his 
computation on the case the equation of engramic thinking. 

Engramic thinking can be stated by: A equals A equals A equals A equals A. 

The engram, when one or more of its restimulators is perceived in the environment 
during a moment of low general tone, may dramatize. The dramatization is the precise content of 
the engram. The aberration is the precise content of the engram. The reaction of an individual’s 
analytical mind when an engram is reactivated is justification. 

There is reason to believe that part of this survival mechanism consists of the axiom: The 
analyzer must never permit an incorrect solution. The engram brings about many incorrect 


20 



solutions. The analyzer may very well become entirely involved with the attempt to discover and 
deliver to a society, or to itself, adequate rational reasons for the behavior of the organism. 

The analytical mind, though working from the command of the engram itself, is unaware 
of the source of the command. Not being able to discover the source, 

it introverts more and more in an effort to solve a problem which contains danger to the 
organism. The analytical mind tends to find the danger without and within the organism. 

There are five ways that the organism can react to a danger in its vicinity. It can attack it, 
avoid it, neglect it, run from it, or succumb to it. In just these ways can the analytical mind, 
which, it must be remembered, is possessed of self-determinism and will power, react to the 
reactive mind. As the general tone lowers, as the analytical mind becomes less and less powerful 
through weariness, continual reverses in general health, etc., the more and more heed it must give 
to the problems unsolved in the reactive mind. These are in essence unsolved problems. As such, 
they contain their own solutions. The analytical mind, unable to reach them, justifies the 
organism’s reaction to them (succumbs to them), causes the organism to attempt to flee from 
them, apathetically may neglect them (as in prefrontal lobotomy), avoids them in many intricate 
ways, or attacks them. The analytical mind is not only not certain where the experience lies on the 
time track, it also does not know whether the menace is within the organism or without it. So it 
can become entirely indiscriminate, and eventually it may achieve highly irrational solutions by 
which it seeks to solve the problems of the highly irrational reactive mind. 

The deep sensory perception channel entering the mind is evidently equipped with an 
“appreciator” which sorts according to the momentary general tone or potential of the analytical 
mind. The higher the general tone or potential of the analytical mind the better the data in the 
appreciator is sorted. The appreciator circuits are evidently fully apprised of engramic content in 
the reactive mind and evaluate restimulators perceived in the environment against the general tone 
of the analytical mind. When that is low, restimulators route more or less directly to the reactive 
mind which instantly responds by fixed connections into the motor controls. Commands to the 
various members, muscles, glands and organs of the body may be sporadic or constant, 
producing a high variety of responses in the body. Entire vocabularies are fed into the voice 
circuits directly from the reactive mind when an engram is restimulated. Orders to be active or 
inactive are fed to other portions. The individual time track of the engram spaces the commands to 
the organism and a dramatization is accomplished which may contain a portion or all of the 
content of the engram as governed by the situation. Psychosomatic ills, hysterias, rages, 
tantrums, criminal acts and any and all content prejudicial to the survival of the organism in which 
the organism is seen to be indulging has as its source the reactive mind. 

The sole and only content of the reactive mind is what exterior sources have done to the 
organism. 

None of the content of the reactive mind is selfmotivated. The auditor is then interested 
only in what is done to the person, not what the person himself has 

done, since, for purposes of auditing, the acts of the organism in its society can be 
discounted beyond diagnosis. Even then they are of small importance to the auditor. 

An organism possessed of an analytical mind, not victimized by incapacitating disease or 
injury (and unimpeded) will commit no act knowingly prejudicial to the survival of the organism 
or other facets within the dynamics. It will combat only those dangers in society which are actual 
menaces. 


21 



Whatever may be the status of the “innate moral sense,” the basic intent of the basic 
personality is to further various energy forms along the dynamics toward the goal. Only moments 
of actual dispersal of the awareness of the analytical mind permit data to be received which is 
prejudicial to the intent of the dynamics. Only from these “unconscious” moments can the 
basically stable and enormously powerful and able analytical mind be aberrated through the 
implantation of unanalyzed, painfully administered, and antagonistic infommation. It is the 
purpose of the auditor to find and exhaust these moments from the life of the individual. Dianetic 
auditing includes therefore, as its basic principle, the exhaustion of all the painfully unconscious 
moments of a subject’s life. By eradicating pain from the life of an individual, the auditor returns 
the individual to complete rationality and sanity. 

The auditor should never be content with merely bringing the person back to normal. He 
should achieve with the person a tone 4 even though this is far in advance of the average state of 
society at this time. A tone 4 with his drives intact and powerful, with his rationality and 
intelligence increased to the optimum, becomes extremely valuable to the society, whatever his 
past. 


Knowing this the auditor can expect a maximum result of lasting duration with any 
preclear not physically hopeless. 

The entire purpose of the auditor is to rehabilitate the basic dynamic and the normal 
purpose or profession of the individual whom he audits. Anything implanted by positive 
suggestion or “education” in the course of auditing is harmful and must be cancelled if delivered. 
Only the basic personality of the individual can decide and evaluate things in his environment. 
Therefore, hypnotism as practiced with positive suggestions should be shunned since any and all 
hypnotic commands with the attendant forgetter mechanisms are no more than artificially 
implanted engrams. Indeed, it is quite usual for the auditor to have to exhaust hypnotically im- 
planted material received either from some hypnotist or from the analytical mind itself when the 
person has been operating under auto-control. Hypnotism as such does not work, and a study and 
short practice in Dianetics will reveal exactly why. 

The auditor is attempting to delete the reactive mind 

from the individual. This reactive mind is an infestation of foreign, careless and 
unreasoning commands which disrupt the self-determinism of the individual to such an extent that 
he no longer has charge, through his analytical mind, of the organism itself but finds himself 
under the continual and chronic orders of unseen, neverreviewed exterior forces, often and 
usually antipathetic to the survival of the organism. 

Engrams deal with identities where no identities exist. They therefore pose many strange 
and irrational problems which are seen as aberrations in preclears. If a human being has been 
born, he can be supposed to have at least one engram. Anyone who has a birth which has not 
been cleared by therapy has therefore a reactive mind. There is no disgrace attached to having a 
reactive mind since it was thrust without his consent and without his knowledge upon an 
unconscious and helpless individual. Sometimes this was done by persons with the best of 
imaginable intentions. A person not possessed of a rational mind cannot be rationally considered 
to be morally responsible, no matter the demands of the current society which hitherto lacked any 
method of determining responsibility. 

The pain contained in the reactive mind is normally severe. The usual parental 
punishments, family complications, reprimands, minor accidents and the battle of the individual 
with his environment, influence but do not cause a reactive mind, nor do these things have the 
power to change materially the reactions of an individual. 


22 



In the background of any individual exist many hidden personalities contained in the 
reactive mind. Dealing in identities, the reactive mind often confuses identities of individuals. 
Therefore, irrational attachments and antipathies are formed by aberrated individuals who can 
often find no reason for such attachments or antipathies in their contemporary environment. 

The content of an engram is literally interpreted, not as it was stated to the “unconscious” 
subject, but as it was received in its most literal phraseology and perception. 

The organism possesses many inherent mechanisms and abilities by which it can learn or 
preserve or forward itself along the dynamics. Any one of them may be exaggerated by engrams 
to a point where it becomes an actual threat to the organism or impedes it. Engrams can and do 
aberrate all the sensory perceptions, any and all parts of the body, and the mind itself. By 
demanding suicide the engram can destroy the entire organism. 

The error of the reactive mind was introduced by the evolution of speech, for which the 
basic mechanism was not designed. When all perceptics save speech formed the reactive mind, it 
was to some degree serviceable. With speech came such complexities of perception and such 
interchanges of ideas that a whole series of illusions and delusions could be derived from the 
reactive mind’s necessity to determine identities for purposes of emergency. 

With speech the reactive mind came to possess far more power and extensive content. 
The analytical mind, being a delicate mechanism in some respects no matter how rugged and 
capable in others, then could become subjected to delusions and illusions which, however 
shadowy and unreal, must nevertheless be obeyed. By stripping the reactive mind of its past 
painful content the analytical mind may be placed in complete command of the organism. 

The moment a man or a group becomes possessed of this ability, it becomes possessed of 
self-determinism. So long as these possess reactive minds, irrationalities will persist. Because it 
contains literal speech, no reactive mind can be conceived to be of any value whatsoever to the 
rational organism since the methods of that reactive mind remain intact and will continue to act to 
preserve the organism in times of “unconsciousness” of the analytical mind. There is no residual 
good in any reactive mind. It is capable of any illusion. It has no assist power along the dynamics 
save only to cancel or modify other reactive mind content. The source of the individual’s power 
and purpose is not derived from the reactive mind but from the Basic Dynamic and its eight 
divisions. Any auditor will establish this to his own satisfaction after he has run a very few cases. 

When an individual during auditing is attempting to “hold on to his aberrations,” the 
auditor may be assured that that person has as part of the content of the reactive mind such 
phrases as, “don’t dare get rid of it,” which, identically translated, apparently applies to aber- 
rations. It may, in fact, apply in an engram containing an attempted abortion. 

The identity factor in the reactive mind may cause the analytical mind to respond 
irrationally in auditing and to justify the aberrations in many irrational ways. Whatever means he 
uses or statements he makes to avoid the exhaustion of his reactive mind is contained exactly in 
the reactive mind as a positive suggestion and has no application whatsoever in rational thought. 

Individuality (if by that is meant a man’s desires and habits) is not traced to the reactive 
mind save when by individuality is meant those flagrant eccentricities which pass in Dickens for 
characters. 

A man is much more an individual after his reactive mind has been cleared. 


23 



.c. DRAMATIZATION 


Dramatization is the duplication of an engramic content, entire or in part, by an aberree in 
his present time environment. Aberrated conduct is entirely dramatization. Aberrated conduct will 
occur only when and if an engram exists in the reactive mind of the aberree. That conduct will be 
a duplication of such an engram. The degree of dramatization is in direct ratio to the degree of 
restimulation of the engrams causing it. A mild dramatization would be a similarity to the engram. 
A severe dramatization would be an identity with the engram. 

The general tone of an aberree, when high — when his person is unwearied and he is well 
and not directly menaced in his environment — does not permit as great an influence by the reactive 
mind, since the tone level of the entire individual possesses too great a differential from the tone 
of the engram. As the general tone of the individual approaches the tone level of the engram under 
restimulation, dramatization becomes more severe. 

The analytical mind is present to the degree that the general tone of the aberree is high. As 
this general tone lowers through ill health, reverses, or constant restimulation of the reactive 
mind, the analytical mind is proportionately less aware. Dramatization is demonstrated by the 
aberree in inverse ratio to the potential of the analytical mind. A geometrical progression is entered 
as general tone lowers to cause the analytical mind to lose its entire awareness potential. 

Once every engram contains, as the common denominator of all engrams, the 
unconsciousness of the organ which is the analytical mind, dramatizations gain rapidly as this 
interaction progresses. 

In the presence of a relatively high analytical mind awareness-potential dramatization 
takes the form of similarity. The data of the engram is present but is interspersed with or modifed 
by justified thought. The physical pain which is always present as part of the dramatization is 
equally mild, a duplication of the pain which was present during the engram. The awareness 
potential of the analytical mind reduces in the restimulation of the engram which again reduces the 
general tone. 

The aberree is subject to almost continuous dramatization of one engram or another as the 
restimulators appear in his vicinity. (Although the aberration may be so mild as to include only 
some chronically affected organ.) Complete dramatization is complete identity. It is the engram in 
full force in present time with the aberree taking one or more parts of the dramatis personae 
present in the engram. He may dramatize all the actors or merely one of them. His dramatization is 
identity, is unreasoned and always entirely reactive. When the analytical mind reaches the low 
point of awareness potential it held during the engramic incident, that point is also forced upon the 
aberree as a part of the dramatization. The aberree may also dramatize himself as he was at the 
moment of the engram’ s receipt. 

The words, physical actions, expressions, and emotions of an aberree undergoing an 
identity dramatization are those of the single or various dramatis personae present in the engram. 

An engram which can be dramatized may at any time in an aberree’ s future be dramatized 
as an identity dramatization, when and if his general tone is low and his environment becomes 
infiltrated by restimulators. 

An aberree, because of high general tone and other factors, may not suffer the 
restimulation of an engram for a number of years after its receipt. A large number of engrams may 
be present and undramatized in any aberree, if he has never been presented with their particular 
restimulators in an optimum moment for restimulation. The common denominator of all insanity is 


24 



the absence of all or almost all awareness potential in the analytical mind. Insanity can be acute or 
chronic. Any identity dramatization is insanity, by which is meant the entire absence of rationality. 

The aberree commonly and chronically dramatizes locks. The engramic content may 
compel or repress the aberree whenever restimulated. An irrational person is irrational to the 
degree that he dramatizes or succumbs to engramic content in his reactive mind. The computations 
which can be made on the basis of dramatization are infinite. The reactive mind thinks in 
identities. Dramatizations are severe as they approach identity with the engrams which force them 
into being in the conduct of the aberree. The dianeticist can profit in many ways by these 
principles of dramatization. By examination of the rage or apathy or hysteria patterns of the 
preclear, the dianeticist will find himself in possession of the exact character of the engrams for 
which he is searching. 

In the case of the manic, the fanatic, or the zealot an engram has entirely blocked at least 
one of the purpose lines deriving from a dynamic. The engram may be called an “assist engram.” 
Its own surcharge (not the dynamic force) leads the individual to believe that he has a high 
purpose which will permit him to escape pain. This “purpose” is a false purpose not ordinarily 
sympathetic with the organism, having a hectic quality derived from the pain which is part of it, 
even though that pain is not wittingly experienced. This “assist engram” is using the native ability 
of the organism to accomplish its false “purpose” and brings about a furious and destructive effort 
on the part of the individual who, without this “assist engram” could have better accomplished the 
same goal. The worst feature of the “assist engram” is that the effort it commands is engramic 
dramatization of a particular sort, and if the engram itself is restimulated the individual becomes 
subject to the physical pain and fear which the entire experience contained. Therefore, the false 
purpose itself is subject to sporadic “sag.” This sag becomes longer and longer in duration 
between periods of false thrust. It is easy to confuse, in casual observation, an “assist engram” 
and an actual, valid drive, unless one also observes the interspersed periods of “sag.” The “assist 
engram” may or may not occasionally accomplish something, but it does accomplish a confusion 
in the society that the dynamics of the individual are derived from his bad experiences. This is a 
thing which is emphatically untrue. 

Inherently the individual has great will power. This however can be aberrated. Will 
power or its absence occasions the attitude of the aberree toward his reactive mind. 

The prevention of the dramatization of an engram or a lock further reduces dynamic thrust 
of the aberree. Chronic prevention lowers his general tone toward the break point. Unhampered 
dramatization, as it contains restimulation of a physical pain and the reduced potential of the 
analytical mind, produces other harmful effects. 

Necessity can and does render inactive the entire reactive mind. Dramatization occurs 
most often in the absence of necessity or when the reactive mind has obscured the presence of 
necessity. 

Dramatization is residual in the motor controls including speech and can be allayed by the 
physical exhaustion of the individual. The organism during dramatization tends to revivify toward 
the moment of the engram’ s occurrence — the engram containing, as one of its identity parts, the 
complete physical condition of the organism as at the moment of laying-in of the engram. 

There is no folly or facet of human activity which cannot be dramatized. An immediate 
alleviation can be achieved when addressing an aberree who is in identity dramatization by acting 
upon the fact that the conditions of auditing, with no exception, already exist; i.e., the preclear 
returned to the moment of occurrence. Affinity may be established and dianetic auditing begun at 
once. He can be persuaded to listen for the phrases he is uttering and they can be alleviated by 
exhaustion on routine procedure. 


25 



.c.THE AUDITOR’S CODE 


Not because it is a pleasant thing to do or because it is a noble idea, the auditor must 
always treat a preclear in a certain definite way which can be outlined as the auditor’s code. 
Failure to follow this code will cause trouble to the auditor, will considerably lengthen and disturb 
his work and may endanger the preclear. The auditor in the first place, at the optimum, should be 
himself cleared; otherwise he will find that many of his own engrams are restimulated as he listens 
to the engrams of his preclears. This restimulation may cause his own engrams to become 
chronic, victimizing him with various allergies and delusions and causing him to be, at best, 
extremely uncomfortable. An auditor can audit while he himself is being cleared as this is a 
peculiar and special method of locating his own engrams, since they become restimulated. 
Becoming painful to him, they can be found and speedily removed. Even if he is not himself 
cleared, the auditor must act like a Clear towards the preclear. The auditor’s code is the natural 
activity of a Clear. 

The auditor must act toward the preclear exactly in the way that the preclear as an 
organism would desire that his own conscious analytical mind would react to and consider the 
organism. An affinity must therefore be maintained at all costs. 

The auditor must never permit himself to lose his temper, become aggravated, to scold or 
badger or antagonize the preclear in any way. To do so would not merely disturb the comfort of 
the preclear but might additionally derange him and might even prohibit further beneficial therapy 
by the auditor. 

The code is nearly “Christlike.” 

The auditor must be confident in that he must continually reassure the preclear when 
restimulated engrams cause despondency on the preclear’ s part. A cheerful optimistic presence 
encourages the preclear through his most painful experiences. 

The auditor must be courageous, never permitting himself to be intimidated by either the 
aggression or hostility of the preclear. 

The auditor must be kind, never indulging in hostilities or personal prejudices. The 
auditor must be trustworthy, never betraying or capriciously denying a preclear and above all 
never breaking his word to the preclear. An auditor must be clean, for personal odors or bad 
breath may be restimulators to the preclear or may disturb him. The auditor must take care not to 
offend the concepts or sensibilities of the preclear. 

The auditor must be persistent, never permitting the case of the preclear to either resist 
him or to remain unsolved until it is in a proper tone four, since the restimulation of engrams is a 
malady unto itself unless they are being properly exhausted. 

The auditor must be patient, never hurrying or harassing the preclear beyond the needs of 
stirring an engram into view. He must be willing to work at any and all times necessary and for 
the length of time necessary to exhaust the engrams in process of elimination. 

In addition to these things it may be remarked that a definite affinity is established 
between the auditor and preclear during the auditing. In the case of opposite sexes this affinity 
may amount to an infatuation. The auditor must remain aware of this and know that he can and 
should redirect the infatuation to some person or activity other than himself when auditing is at an 
end. Not to do so is to produce an eventual situation wherein the preclear may have to be rebuffed 
with consequent trouble for the auditor. 


26 



.c. AUDITING 


The auditing technique consists of assisting the preclear’ s analytical mind or some part of 
it with the auditor’ s analytical mind. The auditor then functions during each successive period of 
auditing, and only during the periods themselves, as an extra analytical mind of the preclear. 

The reactive mind was received during the dispersal or inactivity of the analytical mind. 
The reactive mind is removed by “returning” the preclear to the engram, and laying its contents 
before the scrutiny of the analytical mind. 

This technique may be considered the lowest common denominator of a number of 
techniques. Anything which will serve this purpose and permit auditing to be accomplished 
efficiently is valid technique. 

The optimum is purely personal affinity brought about by understanding and 
communication with the preclear on agreeable subjects. Another and almost useless method is 
narcosynthesis together with the vanous drugs and hypnotics used to produce sleep. Methods can 
be found such as faith healing, books on 

medical hypnosis, the techniques of Indian medicine men and so forth. It is pointless to 
delineate these methods here. They are currently available under the name of hypnotism but a 
caution should be enjoined that hypnosis as itself is not at all acceptable to Dianetics and indeed 
has extremely limited use. Briefly, however, it must be remarked that if hypnotism is studied to 
advance these techniques, all positive suggestion and post-hypnotic suggestion must be avoided 
as these suggestions depend for their effectiveness upon the already existing content of the 
reactive mind and will only form additional locks. 

Any and all so-called hypnotic drugs have definite drawbacks since they, like so many 
other things, may be termed “shot-gun” methods. These paralyze not only the analytical mind but 
the remainder of the organism so that it is nearly impossible to obtain the proper somatic reaction 
in the preclear. They are not anesthetics but anesthesias. By using them the auditor instantly 
denies himself the main material which will lead him to the engram, which is to say, restimulated 
physical pain. Such restimulated pain is never of very great magnitude and is obliterated by the 
use of anesthesias. 

At no time should the auditor permit the preclear to be under the delusion that he is being 
hypnotized. This is mentioned because hypnotism is a current fad and the principles of Dianetics 
have nothing whatever to do with hypnotism. Both are based upon simple natural laws but have 
between them an enormous gulf. One is the tool of the charlatan and the other is the science of the 
human mind. 

Regression in its simplest form, hereafter called return, is employed in dianetic 
auditing.17 It would be an extraordinary case which required revivification. Return is the method 
of retaining the body and the awareness of the subject in present time while he is told to go back 
to a certain incident. Dates are not mentioned. His size is not mentioned. Various means are used 
to restimulate his memory. Any of the perceptics may be employed to return him to some period 

of his past. He is told simply to “go back to the time when .” He is asked to recount what 

he can of the incident. He is told that he is “right there” and that he can “recall this.” Little else is 
said by the auditor save those hints necessary to return the preclear to the proper time. 

The preclear is not allowed at any moment to revivify in that period since the data is 
drained as a surcharge from his time track to present time. He is told that he can remember this in 
present time since that will occasion the somatics to return to present time. Most of the data is 


27 



located by observing some somatic pain in the individual or some somatic aberration and seeking 
to discover wherein it was received. 

The somatics are employed primarily because the motor controls possess a less disturbed 
time track than the sensory strip. Anything which tends to lighten these somatics is then 
antipathetic to auditing. It must be remembered that there is no aberration without an 
accompanying somatic. The somatics alone, being physical ills of one sort or another, hold the 
aberrated content of the reactive mind in place. The motor controls can be returned to a period 
although the conscious or analytical mind believes itself to be entirely in present time. By talking 
to the muscles or motor controls or various bodily aches and pains, the auditor can shift them at 
will up and down their time track. This time track is not connected to the analytical mind and 
speech, but is apparently a parallel time track with greater reliability than the sensory track. The 
precision of data contained in the motor control time track is enormous. Muscles can be made to 
tense or relax. Coughs, aches, and pains can be made to come and go simply by uttering the right 
words for the engrams, or the wrong words. 

It is the primary task of the auditor to cause the time tracks of the motor strip and the 
sensory strip to come into parallel. That the time track exists in the strips has not been proven but 
they can so be considered for the purposes of this explanation. That they exist is extremely 
apparent. The motor strip time track can be asked questions down to the smallest moment of time, 
and the area of an engram can be so located and its character determined. 

As an analogy, a dream may be considered as the reception by the remaining analytical 
mind of a distortedly reflected and indirectly received picture of the engrams. This applies only 
when the dream is specifically directed at the reactive mind. It will be found that a preclear with a 
large and active reactive mind does not dream to any great extent in normal sleep but that a release 
may dream pleasantly and consistently. A dream in its normal function is that powerful and 
original mechanism called the imagination compositing or creating new pictures. 

The use of the dream is not highly technical and has little value in Dianetics. The auditor 
gleans data from the preclear by his own remarks about any subject, or by the preclear’s 
illogicalness on a subject. The auditor tells the preclear to dream about this data. When the 
preclear has had the dream he is directed to go back to the engram causing the dream. Quite often 
he will do so. If he does not, or if he becomes hostile, it is certain that an engram exists on the 
subject. 


The lie detector, the encephalograph and many other means are of limited usefulness in 
determining both the character and the extent of the engrams since into these as into the dreams 
can be fed the restimulators of the preclear. A codified restimulator list can be created which will 
be found to be common to most preclears. It should include all types of illnesses, accidents, the 
common trite phrases of the society, and names of various persons who commonly surround a 
child during his childhood. Such a codified restimulator list would be interesting for experiment 
and every auditor can compose his own. These are best composed after auditing the individual 
preclear and after inquiry into his life to determine the various irrationalities of thought. 

In that engrams are identity thought, the remarks of the preclear about his engrams will be 
found to be included in the content of those engrams. When the preclear is asked to imagine a bad 
situation at certain ages and under hypnotic conditions, he will very often deliver up a complete 
engram. The auditor must realize that every remark that a preclear makes while he is going over 
his reactive mind is probably some part of the content of that reactive mind. That mind is literal. 
The words the preclear uses when referring to it must be literally evaluated. 


28 



.c. DIAGNOSIS 


It is a useful and positive principle that whatever confronts or contests the analytical mind 
of the preclear will also confront and contest the analytical mind of the auditor. When the auditor 
is acting as the analytical mind of the preclear, whatever emotion or antagonism is directed 
towards him is the emotion or antagonism which is directed by the reactive mind toward the 
preclear’s own analytical mind. If a preclear cannot hear what people are saying in his engrams, 
he has another engram about “can’t hear.” If he cannot feel anything in his engram, it is because 
he has an engram about “can’t feel.” If he cannot see, he has an engram about not being able to 
see, and so forth. If he cannot return, he has an engram about going back, or returning to 
childhood, or some such thing. If he is doubtful and skeptical about what is happening or what 
has happened to him, it is because he has an engram about being doubtful and skeptical. If he is 
antagonistic, his reactive mind contains a great deal of antagonism. If he is self-conscious or 
embarrassed, it is because his reactive mind contains self-consciousness or embarrassment. If he 
insists on maintaining his own control, refusing to do what the auditor tells him to do (although 
he is returned), it is because he has an engram about self-control, and so forth and so on. This is 
identity thought, and is used in diagnosis. 

The return is the best method of learning the problems of the preclear. Trying to work the 
preclear into remembrance, hearing, seeing, feeling, going back and forward, going to sleep, 
awakening, and taking due notice of what he says about the entire process will form a rather 
complete diagnosis on one who is not insane. Questioning the preclear as to what is wrong with 
him while returned will elicit replies straight out of his principal engrams. Listening to an endless 
justification of his actions is both a delay and a waste of time but listening to what he has to say 
about what he thinks has happened to him or what he is afraid of is of definite value. 

The insane form and pose a slightly different problem but essentially the same. 

It is a clinically established observation that the reactive mind is relatively shallow. Below 
it lies the basic personality of the individual no matter how “insane” he may be. Therefore, by one 
means or another, a rational being may be reached within a person, a being which is not 
aberrated. It is this fact of non-aberration which makes the basic personality a difficult aid in 
diagnosis. Here however it can be established what the person really wants, what he hopes, what 
he actually feels. It has been observed that no matter what his raving state, providing his brain 
structure is normal and complete, the basic personality is entirely sound and sane and will 
cooperate. After auditing the person will become this strong, competent and able personality. 

The reactive mind, when unable to exert itself to its aberrated full in the environment of 
the person, will break the person, or cause him to lose tone. Therefore it is of definite interest to 
discover what immediately preceded the break of the preclear or what is currently causing him 
unhappiness. Something is dispersing his dynamics. The probability is that he has a chronic 
restimulator in his vicinity. Wives, husbands, mothers, fathers, superiors, etc., can be the source 
of such breaking since they turn the purpose of the reactive mind, which pretends to desire above 
all else the best interest of the person, back upon the person himself. Thus these sources cause the 
individual to lower back into the tone of the reactive mind, apathy, or a low tone two. 

The problem of the fixed person and the problem of the sympathy engram are both visible 
in the aberrated individual. The identity thought of the reactive mind has taken some part of the 
personality of some individual in the current environment and referred it to some part of the 
personality of an individual in the engramic past. The discovery of this identity is one of the 
principal problems in auditing. The sympathy engram is of a very specific nature, being the effort 
of the parent or guardian to be kind to a child who is severely hurt. If that parent or guardian has 
shown the child antagonism prior to the time of the injury, the adult (preclear) is prone to 


29 



reactivate the injury in the presence of the identity personality with whom he is now associated. 
This causes many somatic ills to present themselves in the present. Only the exact words of a 
sympathy engram will soothe the aberrated personality. 

There are not many personality types. A human being learns through mimicry. If his own 
self is found to be too painful he can become another self and very often does. A tone four can 
become another person at will without being aberrated about it, thus enjoying books and plays by 
“being” the person portrayed. But an aberrated individual can become part of the engramic cast of 
his reactive mind and so solve all of his problems in such an aberrated fashion. Aberrated persons 
are not themselves since they do not possess their own determinism. 

As has been stated, those emotions, doubts, worries and problems which confront the 
auditor when attempting to place the preclear in reverie or to work him in that reverie will lead the 
auditor into the basic content of the reactive mind. 

There are certain definite manifestations which can be suspected and certain routines 
which follow every case. Every human being has been carried in the womb and every human 
being has been born. The discovery of the basic engram on each chain is extremely important. 
Finding the basic engram is like taking the enemy in the flank. There is nothing before it, 
therefore the end most remote from the adult life of the individual is the end most exposed for the 
attack of the auditor. 

In the basic engram the preclear can see, feel, hear, and freely emote. When he is 
returned to later incidents, it may be found that he cannot do these things no matter how hard the 
auditor works to enable him to do so. By pursuing the engramic chain up its chronological 
sequence, this ability will be restored. Therefore it is necessary first and foremost to locate the 
basic engram. This may, in some few cases, lie later than birth. In the majority of the cases it will 
be found to lie at or before birth. No discussion is here entered about the ability of the human 
mind to remember at such remote periods. It can be stated however that when engramic data does 
exist, the time track is opened by pain and antagonism at these extreme points and can be 
contacted and exhausted. It is with the greatest difficulty that the auditor will find the basic 
engram. It is ordinarily quite painful, and since the scanning mechanism has as its purpose (or 
one of its purposes) the avoidance of pain, it will not easily reach them. Like the scanning 
mechanism on a cathode ray tube, the scanners of even a very reduced potential analytical mind 
sweep over, skipping and not touching the data on the engramic chain. By various means the 
auditor must then require the scanners to contact that data and force the data back onto the time 
track where it can be properly exhausted. 

Light prenatals are the best possible approach to a case. When the only prenatal is an 
extremely heavy one or an attempted abortion (which, by the way, are very common), the auditor 
must use a great deal of guile. It can be said that the basic engram and the beginning of the actual 
engram chains is very early, before, near, or during birth, is painful, and will not be easily 
contacted. In that few preclears have more than a few hundred serious engrams, the task is light 
when once begun but requires a great deal of imagination and persuasion. 

A prenatal must always be suspected unless birth, when lifted, rises easily into a tone 
four. If none of the engrams will rise into a tone four, the auditor would suppose that he has not 
discovered the basic. There are three kinds of engrams: the precursor, the engram and the 
follower. By engram here is meant that experience which the auditor has found and is working 
upon. If it does not seem to be lifting after a few recountings, a precursor (earlier engram) must 
be suspected and returned to. In this way an earlier basic may be discovered. Blows in the womb, 
attempted abortions, and birth are the usual basics. Easily the most important are the prenatals. 


30 



When a child is abnormally afraid of the dark, he probably has a severe engramic 
experience in prenatal. This prenatal experience will include all the sound data and sensory data of 
the incident. It is idiotic and identical. The preclear will have somatics. These on the first few 
recountings will be ordinarily faint and then become more severe as more data is located. The data 
will finally be in a more or less complete state and the engram will begin to lift, rising up through 
the various tones. All prenatals are apathy experiences and are therefore serious. Minor taps and 
discomforts in the womb are of no consequence. A true engram will consist of such a thing as a 
knitting needle being rammed through the foetus, half of the foetus’ head being badly injured, 
blows of various kinds bringing about foetal unconsciousness and so forth. Return eventually 
will find an opening into any period when there has been pain. 

Disbeliefs and antagonisms from the preclear on the subject of such a thing as an 
attempted abortion should be overlooked by the auditor or taken into account as the sign of an 
existing engram. A case is recalled wherein a girl insisted that if an abortion had ever been 
attempted on her it should have been successful. Through several sessions, while an attempt was 
made to lift birth, she continued this assertion until the auditor realized that this was probably a 
remark made by the abortionist (or the mother) when his efforts failed. As soon as this was 
suggested to the girl she was able to contact the actual incident. A chronic apathy case under 
treatment for some years in an institution, she suddenly responded to auditing, brought the 
abortion to tone four, erased birth to tone four and recovered mentally and physically into a social 
asset well above normal. 

The auditor should continue to suspect prenatals as long as he cannot get later engrams 
easily into tone four. Once an engramic chain has been lifted at its end nearest to conception, the 
preclear should begin to release relatively automatically, aided but little by the auditor. The erasure 
should be in terms of laughter at its optimum. This laughter is the reversing of charges residual in 
the locks which depended for their fear content or antagonistic content upon the basic engrams. 

Abortion attempts are easy to recognize when an auditor has had some experience. The 
parent who attempted the abortion will, after the child’s birth, likely be a source of anxiety to the 
individual who seems to require a great deal of affection and attraction from that parent. The 
individual will be found to be most fond of the parent (or other) who did not aid, or who actually 
tried to prevent the abortion attempt. At this time abortion attempts are extremely common. When 
an abortion attempt has been lifted, the engramic chain should easily be brought to the time track 
and exhausted. 

Auditing is essentially very simple but it demands precise understanding of the principles 
involved and imagination and sympathy on the part of the auditor. He must learn to compute 
engramically — or learn to think with his analytical mind, only for the purposes of auditing others, 
engramically. His biggest problem is the discovery of the basic of basics. It may elude him for a 
considerable period of time. 

There is, however, preparatory work to do in a case other than the discovery of the basic. 
Occasionally an entire time track must be rehabilitated in which “do not remember” and “can’t 
remember” have obscured the track. Later locks can be found and exhausted in the same manner 
that engrams are exhausted, and rapid scanning methods may be developed in the future for these. 
The hysteria or fear of the individual can be momentarily allayed one way or the other and the 
problem of reaching the basic can be entered upon. There are as many types of case as there are 
cases, but these are the primary fundamentals. 

An auditor must think his way through every case, taking as his data the constantly 
reiterated statements of the preclear during auditing, and accumulating experience as to how 
incidents can be thrust off the time track, burying them from sight by the analytical mind, thus 
forming a reactive mind to the detriment of the organism. 


31 



.c.EXHAUSTION OF ENGRAMS 


The technique of exhausting an engram is not complicated but it must be adhered to. An 
engram is an unconscious moment containing physical pain and conceived or actual antagonism to 
the organism. Therefore, that engram before it is discovered will exhibit antagonism toward the 
auditor trying to discover it. When it is first discovered, it may be found to be lacking in its 
essential data. There are many techniques by which this data can be developed. In a prenatal 
engram the analytical mind apparently must redevelop the situation. Many returns through the 
incident are therefore necessary. 

When an engram will not exhaust, the first thing the auditor should suspect is an earlier 
engram. It is actually possible for a later one to contain essential information which will not permit 
the information to rise. In the course of auditing, when an engram is restimulated by the auditor 
but will not rise above apathy and does not seem to contain all the necessary data, the auditor must 
look for an earlier engram, and it almost inevitably will be found to exist. This precursor is then 
developed as the basic engram. If it follows the same behavior pattern of not lifting or becoming 
complete, another previous to it must be discovered. If at last the auditor is entirely certain that 
there is no engram ahead of the one being run, some possible locking mechanism later on may be 
found and exhausted, at which time the basic may show itself. Continual application of energy to 
the basic will at length bring it into full view and continual recounting of it will gradually develop 
it, raise its tone and lift it into tone four. 

The principle of recounting is very simple. The preclear is merely told to go back to the 
beginning and to tell it all over again. He does this many times. As he does it the engram should 
lift in tone on each recounting. It may lose some of its data and gain other. If the preclear is 
recounting in the same words time after time, it is certain that he is playing a memory record of 
what he has told you before. He must then be sent immediately back to the actual engram and the 
somatics of it restimulated. He will then be found to somewhat vary his story. He must be 
returned to the consciousness of somatics continually until these are fully developed, begin to 
lighten and are then gone. Tone four will appear shortly afterwards. If the preclear is bored with 
the incident and refuses to go on with it, there is either an earlier engram or there is other data in 
the engram which has not been located. 

The auditor will discover that occasionally an engram when lifted into a three, or even 
erased, without reaching laughter, will sag. This is a certain sign of an earlier basic on that chain. 
Any kind of sag from a tone four is impossible if tone four has truly been reached. 

Tone four will not be reached if there are earlier basics. The engram may vanish and be 
erased, but there will be no cheerfulness or laughter about it at the end if it is not the basic. 

Once the basic has been reached and brought into tone four, it will disappear. The next 
engram on the chain will be located and rather easily brought into tone four. If one is accidentally 
skipped, the third in line will be found to hold or sag. The intermediate must then be located and 
brought into a tone four. In such a way the chain will gradually come up into a complete tone 
four. At this time the locks, the merely mentally painful incidents in the person’s life, will begin to 
release automatically. These will erase or lift without any attention from the auditor. While these 
are releasing, the auditor must concern himself with secondary engrarns. These would be 
engrams on their own if they had not had forerunners. They therefore do not relieve after the 
removal of the basic but must be located as themselves. These in turn will start a chain of 
releasing locks which again need no attention. There may be entirely distinct engramic chains in 
the reactive mind which are not appended in any way to the original basic. 


32 



So long as a preclear retains any part of a reactive mind, he will be interested in himself 
(in the condition of his mind) and be introverted. Therefore, so long as he is interested in his own 
reactive mind, he is impeded in his dynamic pursuit of survival. A guarantee of a tone four is the 
patient’ s interest in positive action along his dynamics, and his application of himself to the world 
around him. Introversion is not natural nor is it necessary to the creation of anything. It is a 
manifestation of the analytical mind trying to solve problems on improper data, and observing the 
organism being engaged in activities which are not conducive to survival along the dynamics. 
When a Clear has been reached, the basic personality and self-determinism of the individual will 
have asserted itself. No chronic somatics in the present will remain (excepting those which can be 
accounted for by actual disease, injury or malconstruction of the brain). 

Though more germane to Child Dianetics, it is of help to the auditor to know that a child 
can be considered to have formed his general basic purpose in life somewhere around the age of 
two. This purpose is fairly reliable, as at that time his engrams have probably not gained much 
force over him since his responsibilities are slight. He will have tried to hold his main purpose 
throughout his life but it will undoubtedly have been warped both by his reactive mind’s 
experience content and by his environment. The time when the purpose is formed varies and may 
indeed never have been manifested, as in the case of amentia. As the preclear is normally 
interested in this purpose and its rehabilitation, he will often take a more intense interest in 
auditing if there is an attempt made to discover it. This purpose is quite valid and the preclear can 
be expected to rehabilitate his life along its dictates unless he is too oppressed by his environment. 
(It can be remarked that a Release or Clear will ordinarily order or change his environment. ) 

Vocational therapies have as their source the tenet of the rehabilitation of the general 
purpose of an individual or the establishment of a false purpose in order to allay the activity of his 
reactive mind. It has little bearing on Dianetics, but an auditor, for the term of auditing may 
engage his preclear along the purpose line of becoming a Clear. This is not necessary and is 
indeed often automatic since the basic personality beholds at last a chance to manifest itself. 
However, it will occasionally aid the auditor. 

The auditor should be prepared to have to solve many individual problems since above 
the basics are almost as many problems as there are cases. For example, in the case of a preclear 
who has several very nasty prenatals it will be found that the formation of the body in the womb 
has overlaid or confused the time track so that a later prenatal must be partially lifted before an 
earlier prenatal can be exhausted. This is often true of a later period of life. In one case an entire 
series of prenatals was held down by a dental operation under nitrous oxide at the age of 
twenty-five. Until some portion of this was removed, the bulk of the prenatals were not available. 
In short, the circuits of the mind can become entangled to a point where even the motor control 
time track is confused. 

Dispersal of purpose by some engram along some dynamic or purpose line is a common 
situation and is indeed the basic concept. As a stream of electrons would behave if they were to 
encounter a solid object in their path, so does a drive or purpose disperse. These many varied and 
faint tracks after impact with the engram are symptomatic. Along dynamic two, the sexual drive, 
promiscuity inevitably and invariably indicates a sexual engram of great magnitude. Once that 
engram is removed promiscuity can be expected to cease. 

Anxiety is established in the preclear’ s mind by such dispersals and he dramatizes 
because of the dispersal. This is one of the manifestations of his malady. No pervert ever became 
a pervert without having been educated or abused by a pervert. And that abuse must have been 
very thorough. The contagion of engrams is an interesting manifestation which the auditor should 
and must observe. It can be said that insanity runs in families, not because this is a eugenic truth 
but because a standard patter during emergencies or stress creates certain types of engrams which 
in turn create types of insanities. Insanities are so definitely contagious that when a child is raised 


33 



by aberrated parents, the child becomes aberrated. As would be delineated by Child Dianetics, the 
best way to guarantee a sane child is to provide it with cleared or released parents. This is of 
definite interest to the auditor since he will discover that in cases of severe prenatals and birth the 
engrams were also received by the mother exactly as they were received by the child. The child 
will thereafter be a restimulator to the mother and the mother a restimulator to the child for the 
severe incidents. The mother, having received the exact wording of the engram, also contains the 
engram. Restimulation by the child will occasion the use of the engramic language toward the 
child. This brings the infant and child and adolescent into the unhappy situation of having his 
birth engram or his prenatal engrams continually restimulated. This occasions dire results and 
very great unhappiness in the home and is one of the main sources of family difficulties. 

A child, even if he despises them, will dramatize the actions of his parents when he 
himself is married and when he himself has children. In addition to this the other partner in the 
marriage also has his or her own engrams. Their engrams combine into doubled engrams in the 
children. The result of this is a contagion and a progression of aberration. Thus any society which 
does not have a high purpose finds itself declining and gaining greater numbers of insane. The 
contagion of aberration is at work progressively, and the children become progressively aberrated 
until at last the society itself is aberrated. 

While the fate of society belongs definitely in Social and Political Dianetics, the auditor is 
interested in the fact that he can take the prenatal and birth content of the engrams of his preclear 
and run them to discover post-birth locks and secondary engrams. The mother will normally have 
used much the same data whenever the troubles of the child impinged upon her reactive mind; this 
of course accounts for the locks. 

The auditor will also discover that where he has a married preclear who is aberrated, he 
should have two preclears, which is to say, the partner. It is useless to return a preclear to his or 
her aberrated spouse and expect domestic tranquility to result. While the release cannot and will 
not pick up his old engrams from the spouse in whom he has implanted them, he will, never- 
theless, find his life made unbearable by the mere existence of a spouse that he himself may have 
aberrated. 

Further, the children of these people will also need auditing, since they will be found (if 
the parent’s aberrations were of any magnitude) to be sickly or aberrated or deficient in some 
way. The auditor should therefore, when he undertakes a case, be prepared to audit the family of 
his preclear, should an investigation of that preclear make it seem necessary. 

Aberrations are contagious and where a person has been aberrated, his environment will 
to some degree also have become aberrated. The preclear may, for one thing, be somewhat 
victimized and impeded by his reactive mind which is now existing in his associates. 

The auditor should not permit such terms as “psychoneurotic,” “crazy,” or “mentally 
exhausted” to exist for long in the preclear’ s mind. These are depressive and are actually 
aberrations in the society. It is true and provable that the preclear is on his way to being, not a 
person who is crazy or neurotic, but an individual who will have more stability and self-command 
and ability, possibly, than those around him. To be blunt: this is not the process of reviving 
corpses into a semblance of life. It is a process which, at its best usage, is taking the “normal” and 
“average” and giving them their birthright of happiness and creative attainment in the world of 
man. 


34 



.c.ENGRAM CHAINS 


More than one engramic chain will be found in every aberree. When this person becomes 
a preclear the dianeticist does well to discover the earliest chain. It is not always possible to do 
this with accuracy since apreclearis sometimes in such a nervous condition that he cannot be 
worked on his basic chain but must be alleviated in a greater or lesser degree by the exhaustion of 
a later and more available chain. This last, however, is not the usual case. 

The dianeticist should clearly understand certain working principles and definitions. By 
an engram is meant a moment of unconsciousness accompanied by physical pain and conceived 
antagonism. The basic engram is the earliest engram on an engram chain. Also there may be 
engrams of the same character and kind on the same drive line as the basic engram of the chain. 
An engram chain is composed of a basic engram and a series of similar incidents. Engram chains 
also contain locks which are instances of mental anguish more or less known to the analytical 
mind. These are often mistaken by the preclear for the cause of his conduct. A true engram is 
unknown to the conscious computer of the preclear but underlies it as a false datum on which are 
erected almost equally unknown similar incidents and an enormous number of locks. 

In order to release an engram chain it is vital and absolutely necessary to discover the 
basic of that chain. An individual will have more than one engram chain but he has a basic chain. 
This must be released as soon as possible after auditing is begun on the preclear. 

When an engram is discovered by the dianeticist, he must examine the aspect of it to 
determine whether or not it is the basic. Discovering it is not, he must immediately determine an 
earlier basic, and so forth until he is obviously on the scene of the basic engram. 

There are certain tests which he can apply. A basic engram will rise to laughter, “sag” 
slightly, and then rise to tone four and vanish. Successive engrams will then erase from that chain 
with very little work. Almost any engram on an engram chain can be exhausted, but if it is not a 
basic engram it will recede and vanish at times but will rise in part again when the basic engram 
has been reached and the preclear is brought forward into its area. 

An engram not basic is subject to “sag.” Which is to say that it may be brought to the two 
point zero (2.0) tone, but after a certain length of time has elapsed — from one to two days — it 
will be found to have “sagged” and to be, for instance, in a one point one (1.1) tone. It can be 
successively lifted until it is apparently in a three point zero (3.0) tone, at which point much of its 
content will disappear. This is reduction. 

Any engram chain can be reduced to some degree without reaching the basic but when it 
has been reached the basic itself and subsequent engrams can be brought rapidly to tone four 
providing no engrams are skipped on the return up the time track. 

When an engram chain has been brought to tone four, it can be considered to have 
vanished. The preclear can no longer find it on the time track (he may even be unable to recall 
some of its most painful and disheartening aspects). The mind apparently has been proofed 
against the data it has contained. A search for an engram chain after it has been exhausted and a 
tone four has been achieved should, for purposes of auditing, be entirely fruitless. 

Once the basic has been discovered and the engram chain has been brought to tone four 
the locks will vanish of their own accord. If this does not occur then there is something remaining 
or the auditor has been too optimistic about the selection of his basic engram for the chain and has 
not, in reality, discovered it. 


35 



All engram chains should be exhausted from a preclear. These may be discovered to lie 
along the various dynamics but any chain may influence more than one dynamic. 

Another type of engram is the cross engram. This is usually a childhood or adult engram 
which embraces more than one engram chain. The receipt of the cross engram, containing as it 
does the convergence of two or more engram chains, is often accompanied by a “nervous 
breakdown” or the sudden insanity of an individual. A cross engram may occur in a severe 
accident, in prolonged or severe illness under antagonistic circumstances, or a nitrous oxide 
operation. Cross engrams are very easy to locate but should not be addressed by the dianeticist as 
such since an enormous amount of work upon them will not exhaust them until the basic and the 
chains on which the cross engram depends have been brought to tone four. 

Post-battle neurasthenia is almost always traceable to the receipt of a cross engram. This 
must be, of course, an engram in its own right on more than one chain. It is conceivable that it 
may be so severe that it “breaks” the individual even if it lies on only one chain. 

There are certain rules the dianeticist may employ to establish the basic engram of a chain. 
In first entering a case these rules apply as well to the first goal which is the location of the basic 
engram of the basic chain. 

Number one: No engram will lift if the basic of that chain has not been lifted. 

Number two: The basic engram will not lift until the basic instant of the basic engram has 
been reached, which is to say, the first moment of the engram. Ordinarily this is the most 
obscure. 


Number three: If after two or three test recountings of an engram it does not seem to be 
improving, the auditor should attempt to discover an earlier engram. 

Number four: No engram is valid unless accompanied by somatic pain. This may be 
mild. Incidents which do not contain somatics are either not basic (the chain having been 
suspended by some such command as “can’t feel” in the basic) or else it may not even be an 
engram. 

Cases should be entered as near as possible to the basic engram. Then they should be 
returned to earlier incidents until the basic is discovered. 

The running of locks themselves may accomplish some alleviation of a case. 


36 



.c. PRENATAL, BIRTH AND INFANT ENGRAMS 


The human mind and the human anatomy are enormously more powerful and resilient 
than has commonly been supposed. Only incidents of the greatest magnitude in physical pain and 
hostile content are sufficient to aberrate a mind. 

The ability of the mind to store data can scarcely be overrated. In early life before sound 
is analyzed as speech a human being receives and stores exact impressions of everything which 
occurs. At some future date, when similar perceptics are encountered, the reactive mind 
re-analyzes — on the basis of identities only — the content of the early mind. This becomes the 
foundation of the post-conception personality. The actual personality in the individual is powerful 
and very difficult to aberrate. Unlike animals which can be driven mad by minor mechanisms of 
experimental psychology, a man must be most severely handled before he begins to show any 
signs of derangement. That derangement proceeds from the ability of the reactive mind to store 
perceptions from the earliest moments of existence and retain them on either the analytical or the 
reactive plane for future reference. 

The basic personality does not proceed from engrams, and the dynamics of the individual 
are impeded not enhanced by engrams. The dynamics are entirely separate and are as native to the 
individual as his basic personality, of which they are a part. 

Information falls into two categories: the educational or experience level, banked and 
available to the analytical mind on at least its deeper levels; and aberrational, or data stored in the 
reactive mind and often used but never reached by the analytical mind, save through auditing. 
There would seem to be two types of recording. The first is cellular recording in which the cells 
would seem to store data. In that cells in procreating become themselves again — which is to say 
that when cell A divides, both halves are still cell A — cellular intelligence is not lost. Personal 
identity is duplicated. In the case of individual men, procreation is far more complex and 
individual identity is lost — the son is not the father but a genetic composite of vast numbers of 
ancestors. 

The cells of the human being shortly after conception are capable of enormous perceptic 
and retentive power. After a very short time in the womb, the brain and nervous system are 
already operating. From then until birth the human being is apparently capable of computations of 
a rather complex nature on the analytical mind level. Far more certainly he retains information on 
the reactive level. 

Fear, pain, and unconsciousness extend the range of perception of the individual. When 
the human being in the womb is injured his senses extend so as to record sounds outside the 
mother’s body. He records them so well that their precise nature is stored for future reference. 
The human being in the womb responds exactly as it does after birth to the receipt of engrams, 
storing the data with precision and reacting to it. 

The repair facilities available to a human being before birth are greatly enhanced by the 
presence of ample connective tissue, oxygen and sustenance. These repair facilities are 
unimaginably great so that a prenatal human being can be severely torn and ripped without 
becoming structurally deficient. It does, however, receive engrams and these are subject to 
restimulation. In many cases of attempted abortions it was found that large sections of the prenatal 
human being’s brain could apparently be injured without the brain being deficient or even scarred 
after birth. These repair facilities do not however lessen the extreme severity of the engrams 
which can be received by the prenatal human being. The word foetus is dropped at this point and 
it is advised that it should be dropped from the language as a description of a pre-birth human 
being. Insufficient evidence is at hand to make an outright declaration that attempted abortions are responsible for the bulk of our criminal and insane aberrees. But according to the cases at hand 
the attempted abortion must be accounted responsible for the majority. 

The attempted abortion is the most serious aberration producer. So exact is the recording 
of the pre-birth human being that the reactive mind makes no errors in recognizing its enemies 
after birth. The mind becomes aberrated in having to depend upon these same enemies for the 
ordinary sustenance of life while the child is a helpless infant. The diagnosis of a prenatal case is 
relatively simple. Nearly all preclears will be found to have at least one prenatal engram and the 
case will not solve unless that prenatal is reached and exhausted. 

The dianeticist can usually establish the attempted abortion preclear by an investigation of 
the conduct of the infant and child. Uneasiness or unhappiness in the home, a feeling of not being 
wanted, unreasonable fear, and a strong attachment to grandparents or another non-parental 
member of the household are often signs of an attempted abortion. Fear of the dark is usually but 
not always a part of the attempted abortion case. The auditor should suspect an abortion attempt in 
every preclear he audits, at least for this next generation. Whether or not the preclear disbelieves 
the diagnosis is of no importance to the auditor as the prenatal engrams may very well contain the 
words, “Can’t believe it.” The parents themselves, as well as society, mislead the individual as to 
the enormous prevalence of this practice at this time. The attempted abortion preclear may not be 
discovered to be such until considerable auditing has already been done. Any auditing done on an 
attempted abortion preclear, unless it is solely addressed to making the case workable, is wasted 
until the attempted abortions are reached. 

The post-birth aberree presents a somewhat different case than the prenatal since his case 
can be entered at any point and the earliest moments of it can be attained easily. This is not true of 
the attempted abortion preclear. Attempted abortions may run to any number. Since they are easily 
the most prevalent dramatization of engrams in the society, they are repeated time and again. The 
auditor will find it necessary to “unstack” the prenatal period. He will ordinarily reach the latest 
prenatal injury first. As he finds and examines it, it places itself on the time track. By going to 
earlier and earlier attempts, more and more of these engrams are revealed until at last the earliest is 
discovered. The auditor must be prepared to spend many hours of hard work in unstacking 
injuries. He will many times believe that he has reached the basic of that engram chain only to 
discover that another type of abortion was attempted prior to that moment. He need not address 
these engrams for any length of time before he goes on to the earlier one. He should only get 
some idea of them so that they will be easily locatable on the return. The basic engram on the 
attempted abortion case may be found shortly after the first missed period of the mother. 

Its emotion will be exactly that of the person or persons attempting to perform the 
abortion. The prenatal human being identifies himself with himself but an adult returned to the 
prenatal period is reinterpreting the data and will find that he has and is confusing himself with 
other people associated in the attempts. This engramic data may have slumbered for years before it 
became violently restimulated and may indeed never have been awakened. It must be removed, 
however, before a release can be obtained. The auditor should be prepared to unstack fifty or 
more incidents before birth if necessary. 

When he is at last in the vicinity of the basic, even the most skeptical preclear (one who 
has skepticism as part of the prenatal engram chains) will have no further question as to what is 
happening to him. The auditor should be prepared to encounter difficulty in the ability of the 
preclear to hear voices or feel pain, as it is quite common for the engramic content to contain such 
phrases as “Unconscious” and “Can’t see, can’t feel, can’t hear,” this having been the 
misconception of the society regarding prenatal life. 

The auditor should never be appalled at the damage the prenatal human being has received 
and so question the validity of his preclear’ s data. Unless the umbilical cord is severed or the heart 


38 



is stopped it is apparently the case that no damage, particularly in the earlier months, is too great 
for the organism to reconstruct. In that parents performing abortions are usually dramatizing 
attempted abortions which have been performed on them, rationality of content in the engrams 
should not be expected. Even the data given for it by the abortionist father, mother or professional 
is often entirely inaccurate. 

The test of an engram is whether or not it will lift and whether or not the somatics which 
accompanied it disappear and a tone four is obtained. Rearranging data into other sequences will 
not obtain this. The exact content must be brought out. The attempted abortion human being is 
often struck unconscious by the earliest part of each attempt since the head is so available to the 
knitting needles, hat pins, orange-wood sticks, buttonhooks, and so forth which are employed. 
These periods of unconsciousness must be penetrated and will quite ordinarily release slowly. 

The number of prenatal engrams should not particularly appall the auditor for when the 
basic has been discovered and a tone four achieved, the succeeding experiences will lift with 
greater and greater ease. The periods of consciousness interspersed between the prenatal engrams, 
being locks, will vanish. 

Birth is in itself a severe experience and is recorded by the human being from the first 
moments of pain throughout the entire experience. Everything in a birth is engramic since the 
human being conceives the ministrations to be more or less antagonistic when they are 
accompanied by so much pain. A birth must be lifted as a matter of course but not until the 
presence or absence of prenatals has been established. Even after birth has been lifted, prenatals 
should be looked for, since prenatals may often be found only after birth has been exhausted. The 
habits of obstetricians, the presence of sound and speech in the delivery room, the swabbing of an 
infant’s nostrils, the examination of its mouth, the severe treatment administered to start its 
breathing and the drops on the eyes may account in themselves for many psychosomatic ills. A 
cough, however, although it is present in birth and seems to be alleviated by the exhaustion of the 
birth engram, is quite ordinarily blood running down the throat of the prenatal during an attempted 
abortion. Any perception during birth, when difficulty is encountered with breathing, may 
become a restimulator for asthma. Clean fresh air and electric lights may cause allergies and may 
be the principal restimulators. Everything said during birth, as well as everything said during 
prenatal experiences, is recorded in the reactive mind and acts as aberrational matter which can 
and does cause psychological and physiological changes in the individual. Because the parents are 
not greatly in evidence at birth, this experience may not be restimulated for many years. Prenatals, 
on the other hand, restimulate more easily. 

Infant life is very sentient. Delay in learning to talk is delay in learning the complexity of 
handling vocal muscles rather than an inability to record. Everything in infant life is recorded and 
the engrams received in it are extremely valid. 

The auditor will find himself dealing mainly with prenatal, birth, and infant life. The 
cases are very rare which have many important basics in childhood or adult life. These last 
periods contain mainly other engrams which, though they must be addressed to create the release, 
should not engage much initial attention on the part of the dianeticist. Most of the experiences of 
mental anguish in childhood and adult life are founded on very early engrams and are locks which 
are almost self-removing. 

Moments of unconsciousness which contain physical pain and conceived antagonism 
lying in childhood and adult life are serious and can produce aberration. Engram chains complete 
with basic may be found which will, all by themselves, exhaust. 


39 



.c.THE “LAWS” OF RETURNING 


By aberration is meant the aberree’s reactions to and difficulties with his current 
environment. 

By somatic is meant any physical or physically sensory abnormality which the preclear 
manifests generally or sporadically in his environment, or any such manifestation encountered and 
re -experienced during auditing. 

The aberration is the mental error caused by engrams and the somatic is the physical error 
occasioned by the same source. 

The auditor follows the general rule that no aberrations or somatics exist in a subject 
which cannot be accounted for by engrams. He may ordinarily be expected to discover that 
anything which reduces the physical or mental perfection of the subject is engramic. He applies 
this rule first and in practice admits no organic trouble of any character. Only when he has 
obviously obtained a Clear and when he has observed and has had that Clear medically examined 
after a period of sixty days to six months from the end of auditing should he be content to assign 
anything to organic origin. He cannot be expected to know until the final examination exactly 
what somatic was not engramic. In other words he must persistently adhere to one line of thought 
(that the preclear can be brought to mental and physical perfection) before he resigns any mental 
or physical error in the preclear to a purely organic category. Too little is known at this writing of 
the recoverability of the mind and body for a dianeticist to deny that ability to recover. Since 
primary research, considerable practice has demonstrated that this ability to reconstruct and 
recover is enormous, far beyond anything previously conceived possible. 

Dianetics accounts for all faith healing phenomena on an entirely scientific basis and the 
dianeticist can expect himself to consort daily in his practice with what appear to be miracles. 

In addition to knowledge of his subject, considerable intelligence and imagination, and a 
personality which inspires confidence, the dianetic auditor must possess persistency to a 
remarkable degree. In other words, his drives must be phenomenally high. There is no substitute 
for the auditor’s having been cleared. It is possible for an individual to operate with Dianetics 
without having been released and he may do so for some time without repercussion, but as he 
audits he will most certainly encounter the perceptics contained in sorVe of his own engrams time 
after time until these engrams are so restimulated that he will become mentally or physically ill. 

In psychoanalysis it was possible for the analyst to escape this fate because he dealt 
primarily with locks occurring in the post-speech life. The analyst might even experience relief 
from operating on patients since it might clarify his own locks which always had been more or 
less completely available to his analytical mind. This is very far from the case with the dianeticist 
who handles continually the vital and highly charged data which cause physical and mental 
aberrations. An auditor in Dianetics may work with impunity for a very short time only before his 
own condition demands that he himself be audited. While this is aside from the main subject of 
auditing, it has been too often observed to be neglected. 

Every engram possesses some quality which denies it to the analytical mind. There are 
several types. First there is the “denyer” engram which contains the species of phrase, “Frank will 
never know about this,” “Forget it!” “Cannot remember it!” and so forth. Second is the 
self-invalidating engram which contains the phrases, “Never happened,” “Can’t believe it,” 
“Wouldn’t possibly imagine it,” and so on. 


40 



Third is the “bouncer” engram which contains the species of phrase, “Can’t stay here,” 
“Get out!” and other phrases which will not permit the preclear to remain in its vicinity but return 
him to present time. A fourth is the “holder” engram which contains “Stay here,” “Hold still,” 
“Can’t get out,” and so on. 

These are four of the general types which the dianeticist will find occasion him the 
greatest difficulty. The type of phrase being encountered, however, is easily diagnosed from 
preclear reaction. 

There are many other types of engrams and phrases which will be encountered. There is 
the self-perpetuating engram which implies that, “It will always be this way,” and “It happens all 
the time.” The auditor will soon learn to recognize them, forming lists of his own. 

An engram would not be an engram unless it had strong compulsive or repressive data 
contained in it. All engrams are self-locking to some degree, being well off the time track and 
touching it slightly, if at all, with some minor and apparently innocuous bit of information which 
the analytical mind disregards as unimportant. Classed with the denyer variety are those phrases 
which deny perception of any kind. The dianetic auditor will continually encounter perception 
denial and will find it one of the primary reasons the preclear cannot recall and articulate the 
engram. “Can’t see,” “Can’t hear,” “Can’t feel,” and “Isn’t alive” tend to deny the whole engram 
containing any such phrases. 

As the engram is a powerful surcharge of physical pain, it will without any phrases 
whatsoever deny itself to the analytical mind which, in seeking to scan the engram, is repelled by 
the operating principle that it must avoid pain for the organism. As has already been covered, 
there are five ways the organism can handle a source of pain. It can neglect it, attack it, succumb 
to it, flee from it, or avoid it. As the entire organism handles exterior pain sources, so does the 
analytical mind tend to react to engrams. There is an exterior world reaction of the organism to 
pain sources then. This is approximated when the analytical mind is addressed in regard to 
engrams. There is an excellent reason for this. Everything contained in the reactive mind is 
exterior source material. The analytical mind went out of circuit and was recording imperfectly if 
at all in the time period when the exterior source was entered into the reactive mind. 

An analytical mind when asked to approach an engram reacts as it would have had it been 
present, which is to say, in circuit, at the moment when the engram was being received. 
Therefore, an artificial approach to the engram must be made which will pemmit the auditor to 
direct the subject’s analytical mind into but one source of action: Attack. 

The actual incident must be located and re-experienced. In that the analytical mind has 
five possible ways of reacting to the engram and in that the auditor desires that only one of 
these — attack — be used, the preclear must be persuaded from using the remaining four. 

On this general principle can be created many types of approach to the problem of 
obtaining a Clear. The one which is offered in this manual is that one which has met with quicker 
and more predictable results than others researched at this time. It has given, in use, one hundred 
per cent results. In the beginning, at this time, an auditor should not attempt to stray far from this 
offered technique. He should attempt to vary it only when he himself has had extensive and 
sufficient practice which will enable him to be very conversant with the nature of engrams. Better 
techniques will undoubtedly be established which will provide swifter exhaustion of the reactive 
mind. The offered technique has produced results in all types of cases so far encountered. 

There are three equations which demonstrate how and why the auditor and preclear can 
reach engrams and exhaust them: 


41 



I. The auditor’s dynamics are equal to or less than the engramic surcharge in the preclear. 

II. The preclear’ s dynamics are less than the engramic surcharge. 

III. The auditor’s dynamics plus the preclear’ s dynamics are greater than the engramic 
surcharge. 

When the preclear’s dynamics are entirely or almost entirely reduced, as in the case of 
amnesia trance, drug trances and so forth, the auditor’s dynamics are not always sufficient to 
force the preclear’ s analytical mind into an attack upon the engram. 

The auditor’s dynamics directed against an engram in a preclear who has not been 
subjected to a process which will inhibit the free play of his reactive mind and concentrate it, 
ordinarily provokes the preclear into one of the four unusable methods of succumbing, fleeing, 
avoiding or neglecting the engram. Demanding that the preclear “face reality,” or “see reason,” or 
that he “stop his foolish actions” falls precisely into this category. The auditor’s dynamics 
operating against an awake preclear can produce an “insanity break,” temporary or of considerable 
duration in the preclear. 

When the preclear is in reverie some of his own dynamics are present and the auditor’s 
dynamics added to these make a combination sufficient to overcome the engramic surcharge. 

If the auditor releases his dynamics against the analytical mind of the preclear, which is to 
say, the person of the preclear, while an attempt is being made to reach an engram (in violation of 
the auditor’s code, or with some erroneous idea that the whole person of the preclear is 
confronting him) he will receive in return all the fury of the engramic surcharge. 

An engram can be dramatized innumerable times, for such is the character of the reactive 
mind that the surcharge of the engram cannot exhaust itself and will not exhaust itself regardless 
of its age or the number of times dramatized until it has been approached by the analytical mind of 
the subject. 

The additive dynamic drive law must be made to apply before engrams are reached. It is 
occasionally very necessary to change dianetic auditors, for some preclears will work well only 
with either a male or a female auditor, or with one or another individual auditor. This will not be 
found necessary in many cases. Three cases are on record where the preclear was definitely anti- 
pathetic toward the auditor throughout the entire course of auditing. The dianeticist was found to 
be a restimulator for one or more of the persons contained in the engrams. Even so, these persons 
responded. Greater patience was required on the part of the auditor. Closer observance of the 
auditor’s code was necessary and a longer time was required for auditing. It will be discovered 
that once the preclear understands what is desired of him and why, his basic personality is 
aroused to the extent that it will cooperate with any auditor in order to be free. It will suffer 
through many violations of the auditor’s code. Once a preclear has started his auditing he will 
ordinarily continue to cooperate in the major requirements to the fullest extent, no matter what 
apparent antagonisms he may display in minor matters. 

Reverie is a method that has been used with success. The analytical mind of the preclear, 
while reduced in its potential and under direction, is still capable of thinking its own thoughts and 
forming its own opinions. Implicit obedience to whatever the auditor suggests is not desirable as 
the preclear will inject extraneous material at the faintest suggestion of the auditor. Drugs inhibit 
the somatic and have no use in entering a case. 

The fact that the dianeticist is interested solely in what has been done to the preclear and is 
not at all interested in what the preclear himself has done to others greatly facilitates auditing since 
there is no social disgrace in having been an unwitting victim. 

In reverie the preclear is placed in a light state of “concentration” which is not to be 
confused with hypnosis. In the state of alliance, therefore, the mind of the preclear will be found 
to be, to some degree, detachable from his surroundings and directed interiorly. The first thing 
that the dianeticist will discover in most preclears is aberration of the sense of time. There are 
various ways that he can circumvent this and construct a time track along which he can cause the 
preclear’ s mind to travel. Various early experiences which are easily reached are examined and an 
early diagnosis can be formed. Then begins an immediate effort to reach basic, with attempted 
abortion or prenatal accident predominating. Failures on the first attempts to reach prenatal 
experiences should not discourage the dianetic auditor since many hours may be consumed and 
many false basics reached and exhausted before the true prenatal basic is attained. 

In this type of reverie the dianeticist can use and will observe certain apparently natural 
laws in force. They are as follows: The difficulties the analytical mind encounters when returned 
to or searching for an engram are identical to the command content of that engram . 

An aberree in adult life is more or less obeying, as restimulated, the composite 
experiences contained in his engrams. 

The preclear’ s behavior in reverie is regulated by the commands contained in the engram 
to which he is returned and is modifed by the composite of chronologically preceding engrams on 
his time track. 

The somatics of a preclear are at their highest in an engram where they were received and 
at the moment of reception in that experience. 

When returned to a point prior to an engram, the commands and somatics of that engram 
are not effective on the preclear. As he is returned to the moment of an engram, the preclear 
experiences, as the common denominator of all engrams, a considerable lessening of his analytical 
potential. He speaks and acts in a modified version of the engram. All complaints he makes to the 
auditor should be regarded as possibly being verbatim from, first, the engram that he is 
reexperiencing or, second, from prior engrams. 

At the precise moment of an engramic command the preclear experiences obedience to 
that command. The emotion a preclear experiences when regressed to an engram is identical to the 
emotional tone of that engram. Excesses of emotion will be found to be contained in the word 
content of the engram as commands. 

When a preclear is returned to before the moment of reception of an engram he is not 
subject to any part of that engram, emotionally, aberrationally, or somatically. 

When the time track is found to contain loops or is blurred in any portion, its crossings or 
confusions are directly attributable to engramic commands which precisely state the confusion. 

Any difficulty a preclear may experience with returning, reaching engrams, perceiving, or 
recounting, is directly and precisely commanded by engrams. 

An engram would not be an engram were it easy to reach, or if it gave the preclear no 
difficulty and contained no physical pain. 


43 



The characteristic of engrams is confusion. First, the confusion of the time track; second, 
the confusion of an engramic chain wherein similar words or somatics mix incidents; third, 
confusion of incidents with engrams. 

This confusion is occasioned by the disconnected state of the analytical mind during the 
receipt of the engram. Auditing by location and identification of hidden incidents, first rebuilds at 
least the early part of the time track, locates and fixes engrams in relation to one another in time, 
and then locates the basic of the basic chain and exhausts it. The remainder of the chain must also 
be exhausted. Other engrams and incidents exhaust with ease after the erasure of the basic or the 
basic of any chain (within that chain). Locks vanish without being located. A tone four gained on 
basic permits the subsequent erasure on the time track to go forward with ease. A whole chain 
may rise to four without the basic chain having been located. 

Any perception of pre-speech life during reverie denotes the existence of engramic 
experience as far back as the time track is open. 

If the individual’s general tone is clearly not tone four, if he is still interested in his 
engrams, another more basic chain than the one found still exists. 

Engramic patterns tend to form an avoidance pattern for the preclear. From basic outward 
there is an observable and progressive divergence between the person himself and his returned 
self. In the basic engram of the basic chain and for a few subsequent incidents on that chain, he 
will be found within and receiving the experiences as himself. In subsequent incidents cleavage is 
observable, and in late engrams the preclear is found to be observing the action from outside of 
himself, almost as a disinterested party. This forms the principal primary test for the basic of the 
basic chain. Another test for basic is “sag.” 

Any engram may be exhausted to a point where it will recede without reaching tone four. 
Although it is temporarily and momentarily lost to the individual and apparently does not trouble 
him, that engram which has been exhausted in a chain without the basic having been reached will 
“sag” or reappear within twenty-four to sixty hours. Basic on any chain will not “sag” but will lift 
on a number of recountings, rise to tone four and will remain erased. Another test for basic is 
whether or not it begins to lift with ease. If an engram does not intensify or remain static after 
many recountings, it can be conceived to be at least a basic on some chain. Locks will lift and 
disappear without returning as they are not fixed by physical pain. Large numbers of locks can be 
exhausted bringing an alleviation of the preclear’ s difficulties and such a course may occasionally 
be pursued in the entrance of a case. The discovery and lifting of the basic to which the locks are 
appended removes the locks automatically. 

These rules and laws even if modifed in their statement will be found invariable. 
Incompetent auditing cannot be excused by the supposed discovery of a special case or exception. 
A physical derangement must be in the category of actually missing parts of the organism which 
cause permanent disability, and instances of this are not common. 
CASE HISTORIES 


The following case histories have been selected at random. Due to lack of time, these case 
histories are Releases, not Clears. The Releases have been fully diagnosed and researched. 


HYPERTENSION, COMBAT FATIGUE 
TUBERCULOSIS, ARRESTED 

MYOPIC ASTIGMATISM 

A forty-three year old ex- Army officer and author; inclined to petty tyrannies; twice 
divorced; no children. Processed by army as psycho-neurotic. 

Birth was discovered immediately but would not satisfactorily release. The preclear 
experienced great difficulty in visualizing and his aberrations intensified during auditing. 

By use of dreams and restimulation of somatics the preclear was able to reach the 
beginning of the engramic chain as counted backwards from birth. Fifteen prenatal experiences 
were unstacked. They were found lying in two loops. The loops were corrected and the basic 
engram of the basic chain was reached. (A loop is a redoubling of the time track back on itself. In 
this case incidents are not in their correct place on the time track. ) 

The basic consisted of a severe quarrel between his mother and father with several 
abdominal blows being received by the mother. The mother was protesting that it would make her 
sick all of her life. At the same time the mother was coughing from a throat blow. The father was 
insisting that he was master in his own home and that people had to do what he told them. This 
quarrel occurred at about four and a half months after conception and resulted in the temporary 
paralysis of the preclear’s right side. The remainder of the chain consisted of similar incidents, 
evidently dramatizations on the part of the father of his own engrams, as the words used were 
almost identical, one engram to the next. This chain accounted for and relieved the subject’s fear 
that he would be ill and his desire to tyrannize others. 

Birth was then found to consist of near suffocation and considerable antagonism between 
the doctor and the nurse. This was registered as commands to himself to the effect that he was 
blind and could not see. Birth was in the home and dust, camphor, the smell of clean sheets and 
greased metal were the restimulators for this severe lung irritation. This birth was not restimulated 
until the age of five and the prenatals were not restimulated until entrance into the service when the 
need for authority manifested itself. 

No locks were found to need attention and only one half hour of his war experience failed 
to release, that being a new basic. 

Number of hours on case: fifty-five. 


APATHY, PRECLEAR HAD BEEN UNDER PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT FOR 
TWO YEARS PRIOR TO DIANETIC AUDITING. SHE HAD EXPERIENCED NO RELIEF. 
MALNUTRITION. 

An eighteen-year-old girl in a condition of apathy bordering upon a break and worsening. 
She had been recently married. Afraid of her husband. She had done very badly in school, 
sporadically engaged in sexual escapades, relapsing afterwards into an illness which was 
variously diagnosed. 

Case was entered with ease. Birth was reached and would not exhaust. A search for 
prenatals was for ten hours fruitless, until certain somatics were artificially restimulated and 
intensified to the point that the preclear had to recall the incident to find relief. Eight prenatals were 
then unstacked and only two incidents were discovered in confusion with each other, held 
together with a head somatic. 

The basic proved to be a mutual abortion attempt by the mother and father. The mother 
said she would die if anyone found out but that she would probably die anyway. The father said 
that the baby was probably like her and that he didn’t want it. Eighteen penetrations of the head, 
throat and shoulders with a long orange- wood stick — probably in the third month. Several similar 
incidents completed this chain. Coitus followed each attempt at abortion. Another incident proved 
to be a basic without a chain and with innumerable locks: an attempted abortion by a professional 
abortionist who used some form of needle and scraper. Birth was found to be a mild experience. 
Three infant engrams with their own basic were discovered. They consisted of the mother’s fear 
over the injury and the fear that the baby would die. 

Contagion of attempted abortion engrams was particularly manifest in the mother’s 
neurotic dwelling on fear of death, which was obviously a dramatization. 

All neurotic and psychotic symptoms were relieved with a marked improvement in the 
health of the preclear and an increase of twenty-seven points on the Army Alpha test. Time of 
work: 65 hours. 


PSYCHOTIC MURDEROUS RAGES. 

CHRONIC SKIN RASH. 

A thirty-year-old male negro, six feet four inches in height, about two hundred and fifty 
pounds — swamp worker. He was in continual trouble with police and had a considerable jail 
record. He continually dramatized a hatred of women. He also dramatized a continuous suspicion 
that he was about to be murdered. His I.Q. was about eighty-five. 

Uniquely enough this case offered no difficulties in entrance. The subject was extremely 
cooperative with the dianeticist. Birth was found and exhausted without improvement in the case. 
A number of infant and childhood engrams were discovered and tested. Continual address of the 
preclear’ s attention to prenatal life finally brought about a convulsion in which terror and rage 
alternated. The dianeticist was able to induce the preclear to listen to the voices he was hearing and 
to go through with the experience. 

The convulsion proved to be twenty engrams nearer birth than the basic, which lay on 
another chain and which was discovered by dream technique. The convulsion was caused by the 
dramatization of an engram involving the injection of turpentine into the uterus by the mother in an 
attempted abortion. The main engramic chain consisted of the mother’s efforts to abort herself. 
From engramic content it was gathered that the mother was a prostitute, for as many as twenty 
experiences of coitus succeeded two of these abortion attempts. They were too numerous to be 
evaluated. 



The basic chain contained many quarrels about money between the mother and her 
customers. The somatics of this chain were largely bruises and concussions caused by the mother 
ramming herself into pointed objects, or beating her stomach and abdomen. There were many 
loops in the basic chain caused by the similarity of incident and the confusion of coitus with 
abortion attempts. The basic incident was at last discovered and exhausted. It was found to lie 
about twenty days after conception, when the mother first discovered her pregnancy. 

All engrams were exhausted in the basic chain. The convulsion was fully cleared and 
birth was suddenly found to have been a very painful experience, particularly because the child 
was taken by others immediately after birth. Only one engram chain (unconsciousness resulting 
from fist fights) was found in childhood. 

Ever since I was nine years old I have had but one passion - motor
racing. I founded a specialist motor sport magazine in 1970,
simply to be able to live in the environment of a sport where man is
constantly trying to surpass himself while striving to surpass others.
Since my early childhood I had dreamed of one day being a racingcar driver, following in the footsteps of someone as famous as Fangio.
Thanks to contacts made through the magazine I founded, I was
given the opportunity to race and about ten trophies now adorn my
apartment as a result of those races.
On the 13th of December 1973, however, I went to a volcano
overlooking Clermont-Ferrand in central southern France. I went
more to get a breath of fresh air than to take a drive in my car. My
legs were itching after a full year following the races from circuit to
circuit, almost always living on four wheels, so to speak.
The air was cool at the time, and the sky rather gray with a
background mist. I walked and jogged a little and left the path where
my car was parked, aiming to reach the center of the crater called
Puy-de-Lassolas where I often went for picnics with my family in the
summer.
What a superb and breathtaking place it was! To think that
thousands of years ago, right where my feet were standing, lava had
spurted out at incredibly high temperatures. Decorative volcanic
‘bombs’ can still be found among the debris. The stunted vegetation
resembled that of Province in France but without sunshine.
3

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

I was just about to leave and looked for the last time towards the
top of the circular mountain, which was formed by an accumulation
of volcanic slag. It reminded me how many times I had slid down
those steep slopes, as if I was on skis. Suddenly in the fog, I saw a red
light flashing; then a sort of helicopter was descending towards me. A
helicopter, however, makes a noise but at that moment, I could hear
absolutely nothing, not even the slightest whistle. A balloon maybe?

Site of Rael’s first encounter: Puy de Lassolas, near
Clermont-Ferrand, December 13th, 1973.
4

T HE E NCOUNTER

By now, the object was about twenty meters above the ground, and I
could see it had a somewhat flattened shape.
It was a flying saucer.
I had always believed in their existence, but I had never dreamed I
would actually see one. It measured some seven meters in diameter,
about 2.5 meters in height, was flat underneath and cone-shaped. On
its underside, a very bright red light flashed, while at the top an
intermittent white light reminded me of a camera flash cube. This
white light was so intense, that I could not look at it without
blinking.
The object continued to descend, without the slightest noise until
it stopped and hovered motionless about two meters above the
ground. I was petrified and remained absolutely still. I was not afraid,
but rather filled with joy to be living through such a great moment.
I bitterly regretted not having brought my camera with me.
Then the incredible happened. A trap door opened beneath the
machine and a kind of stairway unfolded to the ground. I realized
that some living being was about to appear, and I wondered what it
was going to look like.
First two feet appeared then two legs, which reassured me a little,
since apparently I was about to meet a man. In the event, what at first
I took to be a child came down the stairway and walked straight
towards me.
I could see then this was certainly no child even though the figure
was only about four feet (1.2 meters) tall. His eyes were slightly
almond shaped, his hair was black and long, and he had a small black
beard. I still had not moved, and he stopped about ten meters away
from me.
He wore some sort of green one-piece suit, which covered his entire
body, and although his head seemed to be exposed, I could see
around it a strange sort of halo. It was not really a halo but the air
about his face shone slightly and shimmered. It looked like an
invisible shield, like a bubble, so fine that you could barely see it. His
skin was white with a slightly greenish tinge, a bit like someone with
liver trouble.
5

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

He smiled faintly, and I thought it best to return his smile. I felt
rather ill at ease, so I smiled and bowed my head slightly in greeting.
He answered with the same gesture. Thinking that I had to find out
if he could hear me, I asked: ‘Where do you come from?’
He answered in a strong, articulate voice that was slightly nasal:
‘From very far away.’
‘Do you speak French?’ I enquired.
‘I speak all the languages of the Earth.’
‘Do you come from another planet?’
‘Yes,’ he replied.
As he spoke, he moved closer and stopped about two meters from
me.
‘Is this the first time you have visited the Earth?’
‘Oh no!’
‘Have you been here often?’
‘Very often - to say the least.’
‘Why did you come here?’
‘Today, to talk to you.’
‘To me?’
‘Yes, to you, Claude Vorilhon, editor of a small motor sport
magazine, married and father of two children.’
‘How do you know all that?’
‘We have been watching you for a long time.’
‘Why me?’
‘This is precisely what I want to tell you. Why did you come here
on this cold winter morning?’
‘I don’t know... I felt like walking in the fresh air...’
‘Do you come here often?’
‘In the summer yes, but almost never in this season.’
‘So why did you come today? Had you planned this walk for a long
time?’
‘No. I don’t really know. When I woke up this morning I suddenly had
an urge to come here.’
‘You came because I wanted to see you. Do you believe in
telepathy?’
6

T HE E NCOUNTER

‘Yes, of course, it’s something I’ve always been interested in - as well as
the subject of “flying saucers”. But I never thought I’d see one myself.’
‘Well, I used telepathy to get you to come here because I have
many things to tell you. Have you read the Bible?’
‘Yes, but why do you ask?’
‘Have you been reading it for a long time?’
‘No, as a matter of fact, I bought it only a few days ago.’
‘Why?’
‘I really don’t know. Suddenly I had an urge to read it...’
‘Again I used telepathy to make you decide to buy it. I have chosen
you for a very difficult mission, and I have many things to tell you.
So come into my craft where we can talk more comfortably.’
I followed him, climbing up the small staircase beneath the
machine, which, on closer inspection, looked more like a flattened
bell with a full and bulging underside. Inside it, two seats faced one
another, and the temperature was mild even though the door was still
open.
There was no lamp, but natural light emanated from everywhere.
There were no instruments like those you find in an aircraft cockpit.
The floor was made of a sparkling alloy, which was slightly bluish.
The chairs were colorless and translucent, but very comfortable and
made from one piece of material. I sat on the larger one that was set
closer to the floor, so that the face of the little man sitting in front of
me was at the same level as mine.
He touched a spot on the wall, and the whole machine became
transparent except for its top and bottom. It was like being in the
open air, but the temperature was mild. He invited me to take off my
coat, which I did, and then he started to speak.
‘You regret not having brought your camera so that you could have
talked about our meeting to the whole world - with proof in your
hands?’
‘Yes, of course...’
‘Listen to me carefully. You will tell human beings about this
meeting, but you will tell them the truth about what they are, and
about what we are. Judging from their reactions we will know if we
7

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

can show ourselves freely and officially. Wait until you know
everything before you start speaking publicly. Then you will be able
to defend yourself properly against those people who will not believe
you and you will be able to bring them incontestable proof. You will
write down everything I tell you and publish the writings as a book.’
‘But why did you choose me?’
‘For many reasons. First of all, we needed someone in a country
where new ideas are welcomed and where it is possible to talk about
such ideas openly. Democracy was born in France, and this country
has a reputation the world over for being the country of freedom.
Also we needed someone who is intelligent and quite open to
everything. Above all we needed someone who is a free thinker
without being anti-religious. Because you were born of a Jewish
father and a Catholic mother, we consider you to be an ideal link
between two very important peoples in the history of the world.
Besides, your activities do not in any way predispose you to making
incredible revelations, and this will make your words all the more
credible. Since you are not a scientist, you will not complicate things
and will explain them simply. Not being a literary man, you won’t
compose elaborate sentences, which are difficult to read for a great
many people. Finally, we decided to choose someone who was born
after the first atomic explosion in 1945, and you were born in 1946.
We have in fact been following you since your birth, and even before.
This is why we have chosen you. Do you have any other questions?’
‘Where do you come from?’
‘From a distant planet about which I will tell you nothing for fear
that men of the Earth might be unwise enough to disturb our peace.’
‘Is your planet very far away?’
‘Very far. When I tell you the distance you will understand that it
is impossible to reach it with your present level of scientific and
technical knowledge.’
‘What are you called?’
‘We are people like you, and we live on a planet similar to Earth.’
‘How long does it take you to come here?’
‘As long as it takes to think about it.’
8

T HE E NCOUNTER

‘Why do you come to Earth?’
‘To monitor and watch over the development of humanity.
Human beings on Earth are the future, we are the past.’
‘Are there many people on your planet?’
‘There are more people than on yours.’
‘I would like to visit your planet. Can I?’
‘No. First of all you couldn’t live there because the atmosphere is
different from yours, and you have not been trained for such a
journey.’
‘But why meet here?’
‘Because the crater of a volcano is an ideal place, away from
irksome people. I shall leave you now. Come back tomorrow at the
same time with the Bible and something to take notes with. Do not
bring any metallic object and speak to no one of our conversation,
otherwise we will never meet again.’
He handed me my coat, let me climb down the ladder and waved
his hand. The ladder folded up and the door closed without a sound.
Still without making the slightest murmur or any whistling sound,
the craft rose gently to a height of about 400 meters, then
disappeared into the mist.

9

2
THE TRUTH

Genesis

T

he following day I was at the meeting place again as arranged
with a notebook, a pen and the Bible. The flying machine
reappeared on time, and I found myself face to face once more with
the little man who invited me to enter the machine and sit in the
same comfortable chair.
I had spoken to nobody about all this, not even to those closest to
me, and he was happy to learn that I had been discreet. He suggested
I take notes, and then he started to speak:
‘A very long time ago on our distant planet, we had reached a level
of technical and scientific knowledge, comparable to that which you
will soon reach. Our scientists had started to create primitive,
embryonic forms of life, namely living cells in test tubes. Everyone
was thrilled by this.’
The scientists perfected their techniques and began creating bizarre
little animals but the government, under pressure from public
opinion, ordered the scientists to stop their experiments for fear they
would create monsters, which would become dangerous to society. In
fact one of these animals had broken loose and killed several people.
Since at that time, interplanetary and intergalactic explorations
had also made progress, the scientists decided to set out for a distant
planet where they could find most of the necessary conditions to
pursue their experiments. They chose Earth where you live. Now I
10

T HE T RUTH - G ENESIS

would like you to refer to the Bible where you will find traces of the
truth about your past. These traces, of course, have been somewhat
distorted by successive transcribers who could not conceive of such
high technology and could therefore only explain what was described
as being a mystical and supernatural force.
Only the parts of the Bible that I will translate are important.
Other parts are merely poetic babblings of which I will say nothing.
I am sure you can appreciate that, thanks to the law, which said that
the Bible had always to be re-copied without changing even the
smallest detail, the deepest meaning has remained intact throughout
the ages, even if the text has been larded with mystical and futile
sentences.
So let us start with the first chapter of the Book of Genesis:
1

In the beginning Elohim created the heaven and the earth.
Genesis 1: 1.

Elohim, translated without justification in some Bibles by the word
God means in Hebrew “those who came from the sky”, and
furthermore the word is a plural. It means that the scientists from our
world searched for a planet that was suitable to carry out their
projects. They “created”, or in reality discovered the Earth, and
realized it contained all the necessary elements for the creation of
artificial life, even if its atmosphere was not quite the same as our
own.
And the Spirit of Elohim moved upon the face of the waters.
Genesis 1: 2.

This means the scientists made reconnaissance flights, and what
you might call artificial satellites were placed around the Earth to
study its constitution and atmosphere. The Earth was, at that time,
completely covered with water and thick mist.
11

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And Elohim saw the light, that it was good. Genesis 1: 4.

To create life on Earth it was important to know whether the sun
was sending harmful rays to the Earth’s surface, and this question was
fully researched. It turned out that the sun was heating the Earth
correctly without sending out harmful rays. In other words the “light
was good”.
And the evening and the morning were the first day. Genesis 1: 5.

This research took quite some time. The “day” mentioned here
corresponds to the period in which your sun rises under the same sign
on the day of the vernal equinox, in other words, about 2,000 years
on Earth.
And Elohim made the firmament, and divided the waters which
were under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament. Genesis 1: 7.

After studying the cosmic rays above the clouds the scientists
descended below the clouds but stayed above the waters. That means
they were between the clouds, “the waters which were above the
firmament”, and the ocean covering the whole planet, “the waters
which were under the firmament”.
Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one
place, and let the dry land appear. Genesis 1: 9.

After they studied the surface of the ocean they studied the sea bed
and determined that it was not very deep and fairly even everywhere.
So then, by means of fairly strong explosions, which acted rather like
bulldozers, they raised matter from the bottom of the seas and piled
it up into one place to form a continent.
12

T HE T RUTH - G ENESIS

Originally there was on Earth only one continent, and your
scientists have recently acknowledged that all the continents, which
have drifted apart over many years, used to fit perfectly into one
another to form one land mass.
Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the
fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon
the earth. Genesis 1: 11.

In this magnificent and gigantic laboratory, they created vegetable
cells from nothing other than chemicals, which then produced
various types of plants. All their efforts were aimed at reproduction.
The few blades of grass they created had to reproduce on their own.
The scientists spread out across this immense continent in small
research teams. Every individual created different varieties of plants
according to their inspiration and the climate. They met up at regular
intervals to compare their research and their creations. The people
back on their own planet followed their progress from afar with
passion and amazement. The most brilliant artists came and joined
the scientists in order to give some plants purely decorative and
pleasing roles, either through their appearance or their perfume.
Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the
day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and
for days, and years. Genesis 1: 14.

By observing the stars and the sun they could measure the duration
of the days, the months and the years on Earth. This helped them
regulate their life on the new planet - so different from their own
where days and years did not have the same duration. Research in
astronomy enabled them to locate themselves precisely and to
understand the Earth better.

13

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Let the waters abound with an abundance of living creatures, and
let birds fly above the earth across the face of the firmament of the
heavens. Genesis 1: 20.

Next they created the first aquatic animals, from plankton to small
fish, then very large fish. They also created seaweed to balance this
little world, so that the small fish could feed on it and the bigger fish
could eat the small fish in turn.
Thus a natural balance would be established, and one species
would not destroy another species in order to survive. This is what
you now refer to as “ecology”, and that was achieved successfully. The
scientists and artists met often and organized competitions to
determine which team had created the most beautiful or most
interesting animals.
After the fish they created birds. This was done under pressure, it
must be said, from the artists, who went out of their way to create the
most stunning forms with the craziest colors. Some of them had great
trouble flying because their beautiful feathers were very cumbersome.
The contests went even further, embracing not only physical
characteristics but also the behavior of these animals, particularly the
wonderful dances of their mating rituals.
Some other groups of scientists created frightful animals, veritable
monsters, which proved right those people who had opposed the
creation plans on their own planet. These were dragons, or what you
call dinosaurs and brontosaurs.
Let the earth bring forth the living creature according to its kind:
cattle and creeping thing and beast of the earth, each according to
its kind. Genesis 1: 24.

After marine organisms and birds, the scientists created land
animals on a planet where the vegetation had by now become
magnificent. There was plenty of food for the herbivores. These were
the first land animals which were created. Later they created
14

T HE T RUTH - G ENESIS

carnivores to balance the herbivorous population. Here too, the
species had to maintain equilibrium. Those scientists who did all this
came from the same planet as me. I am one of those people who
created life on Earth.
It was at that time that the most skillful among us wanted to create
an artificial human being like ourselves. Each team set to work, and
very soon we were able to compare our creations. But on our home
planet people were outraged when they heard that we were making
“test tube children” who might come to threaten their world. They
feared that these new human beings could become a danger if their
mental capacities or powers turned out to be superior to those of their
creators. So we had to agree to leave the new humans to live in a very
primitive way without letting them know anything scientific, and we
mystified our actions. It is easy to work out how many teams of
creators did this - each race on Earth corresponds to a team of
creators.
Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the
air, and over the cattle, over all the earth and over every creeping
thing that creeps on the earth. Genesis 1: 26.

“In our image!” You can see that the resemblance is striking. That
is when the trouble started for us. The team located in the country
you now call Israel, which at the time was not far from Greece and
Turkey on the original continent, was composed of brilliant creators
who were perhaps the most talented team of all.
Their animals were the most beautiful and their plants had the
sweetest perfumes. This was what you call “paradise on Earth”. The
human beings they created there were the most intelligent. So steps
had to be taken to ensure that they did not surpass their creators. The
created, therefore, had to be kept in ignorance of the great scientific
secrets while being educated for the purpose of measuring their
intelligence.
15

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Of every tree of the garden you may freely eat; but of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day
that you eat of it you shall surely die.. Genesis 2: 16-17.

This means you - the created - can learn all you want, read all of
the books that we have here at your disposal, but never touch the
scientific books, otherwise you will die.
He brought them to the man to see what he would name them.
Genesis 2: 19.

Human beings had to have a thorough understanding of the plants
and animals living around them, their way of life, and the way to get
food from them. The creators taught them the names and the powers
of everything that existed around them since botany and zoology
were not considered dangerous for them. Imagine the joy of this team
of scientists, having two children, a male and a female running
around, eagerly learning what was being taught to them.
The serpent... said unto the woman... of the fruit of the tree
which is in the midst of the garden... ye shall not surely die, for
Elohim doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be like Elohim. Genesis 3: 1-5.

Some scientists in this team felt a deep love for their little human
beings, their “creatures”, and they wanted to give them a complete
education in order to make them scientists like themselves. So they
told these young people who were almost adults that they could
pursue their scientific studies and in so doing they would become as
knowledgeable as their creators.
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked. Genesis 3: 7.
16

T HE T RUTH - G ENESIS

The new human beings then understood that they could also
become creators in their turn, and they became angry at their
“parents” for having kept them away from scientific books,
considering them to be like dangerous laboratory animals.
1

And Yahweh Elohim said unto the serpent, ‘Because thou hast
done this, thou art cursed... upon thy belly shalt thou go, and
dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life.’ Genesis 3: 14.

The “serpent” was this small group of creators who had wished to
tell the truth to Adam and Eve, and as a result they were condemned
by the government of their own planet to live in exile on Earth, while
all the other scientists had to put a stop to their experiments and leave
the Earth.
Unto Adam also and to his wife did Yahweh Elohim make coats
of skins, and clothed them. Genesis 3: 21.

The creators gave their creations the basic means of survival,
enough to manage without needing any further contact with them.
The Bible has preserved a sentence, which is close to the original
document:
2

Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil :
and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of
life, and eat, and live for ever. Genesis 3: 22.

Human life is very short, but there is a scientific way to prolong it.
Human scientists who study all their lives can only begin to amass
sufficient knowledge to start making interesting discoveries when
they get old, which is the reason why human progress is so slow. If
humans could live ten times longer, scientific knowledge would take
a gigantic leap forward.
17

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

If when they were first created these new beings could have lived
much longer, they would have quite rapidly become our equals
because their mental faculties are slightly superior to our own. They
are unaware of their full potential. This applies especially to the
people of Israel who, as I mentioned earlier, had been selected in a
contest as the most successful type of humanoid on Earth due to their
intelligence and genius. This explains why they have always
considered themselves to be the “chosen people”. In truth they were
the people chosen by the teams of scientists who gathered together to
judge their creations. You can see for yourself the number of geniuses
born out of that race.
So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden
of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life. Genesis 3: 24.

Soldiers with atomic disintegration weapons were placed at the
entrance to the creators’ residence to prevent human beings from
stealing more scientific knowledge.’

The Flood
‘Let us move on to the fourth chapter of Genesis.
And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the
fruit of the ground an offering unto Yahweh. And Abel, he also
brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof.
Genesis 4: 3-4.

The creators in exile who were left under military surveillance,
urged the human beings to bring them food in order to show their
own superiors that the newly created people were good, and that they
18

T HE T RUTH - T HE F LOOD

would never turn against their creators. Thus they managed to obtain
permission for the leaders of these first human beings to benefit from
the “tree of life”, and this explains how they lived so long: Adam lived
for 930 years, Seth for 912 years and Enos for 905 years, and so on
as is stated in Genesis, Chapter 5, Verses 1-11.
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of
the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of
Elohim saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they
took them wives of all which they chose. Genesis 6: 1-2.

The creators living in exile took the most beautiful daughters of
humanity and made them their wives.
My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh:
yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. Genesis 6: 3.

Longevity is not hereditary and much to the relief of the
authorities on the distant planet, the children of the new human
beings did not automatically benefit from the “tree of life”. Thus the
secret of life was lost, and mankind’s progress was slowed down.
When the sons of Elohim came in unto the daughters of men,
and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men
which were of old, men of renown. Genesis 6: 4.

There you have proof that the creators could have intercourse with
the daughters of humanity whom they had created in their own
image, and in so doing produced exceptional children. These actions
seemed very dangerous to people on the distant planet. The scientific
progress on Earth was fantastic, and they decided to destroy what had
been created.

19

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And Elohim saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was
only evil continually. Genesis 6: 5.

The “evil” in question was the desire of human beings to become
scientific and independent people equal to their creators. Being
“good”, as far as those on the Elohim’s planet were concerned meant
the new human beings would remain primitive, vegetating on the
Earth. Their “evil” was their wish to progress, perhaps enabling them
one day to catch up with their creators.
The government then decided from their distant planet to destroy
all life on Earth by sending nuclear missiles. However when the exiled
creators were informed of the project they asked Noah to build a
spaceship, which would orbit the Earth during the cataclysm
containing a pair of each species that was to be preserved.
This was true figuratively speaking, but in reality - and your
scientific knowledge will very soon enable you to understand this - a
single living cell of each species, male and female, is all that is
required to recreate a whole being. This is something like the first
living cell of a fetus in the womb of its mother, which already
possesses all the information needed to create a human being right
down to the color of its eyes and hair. This was a colossal task, but it
was completed on time.
When the explosion took place, life had already been preserved a
few thousand kilometers above the Earth. The continent was
submerged by a gigantic tidal wave, which destroyed all forms of life
on its surface.
The ark... was lift up above the earth. Genesis 7: 17.

As you can clearly see, it is said that the ark was lifted “above” the
Earth and not “on” the water.
Then it was necessary to wait until there was no more dangerous
radioactive fallout:
20

T HE T RUTH - T HE F LOOD

And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days. Genesis 7: 24.

The spacecraft had three sections:
...and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with
lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. Genesis 6: 16.

Later it landed on Earth, and besides Noah, it carried a couple
from each race of human beings on the Earth.
And Elohim remembered Noah... and Elohim made a wind to
pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged. Genesis 8: 1.

After monitoring the level of radioactivity and dispersing it
scientifically, the creators told Noah to release the animals to see if
they could survive in the atmosphere. This operation was successful,
and they were able to venture out into the open air. The creators then
asked the human survivors to work and multiply, and show their
gratitude to their benefactors who had created them and saved them
from destruction. Noah agreed to give a portion of their harvest and
their cattle to the creators to ensure they survived:
And Noah builded an altar unto Yahweh; and took of every clean
beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
altar. Genesis 8: 20.

The creators were happy to see that humans wished them well, and
they promised never to try to destroy their creation again. They
understood that it was only normal for them to want to progress
scientifically.
...for the imagination of man’s heart is evil. Genesis 8: 21.
21

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The goal of humankind is scientific progress. Each race of
humanity was then returned to its original place of creation, and each
animal was recreated from the cells which had been preserved aboard
the ark.
And by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.
Genesis 10: 32.’

The Tower of Babel
‘But the most intelligent race, the people of Israel, was making such
remarkable progress that they were soon able to undertake the
conquest of space with the help of the exiled creators. The latter
wanted their new human beings to go to the creators’ planet to obtain
their pardon, by showing that they were not only intelligent and
scientific but also grateful and peaceful. So they built an enormous
rocket - The Tower of Babel.
And now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do. Genesis 11: 6.

The people on our planet became frightened when they heard
about this. They were still observing the Earth and knew that life had
not been destroyed.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another’s speech. So Yahweh
scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth.
Genesis 11: 7-8.

22

T HE T RUTH - T HE TOWER O F B ABEL

So they came and took the Jews who had the most scientific
knowledge and scattered them all over the continent among primitive
tribes in countries where nobody could understand them because the
language was different, and they destroyed all their scientific
instruments.’

Sodom and Gomorrah
‘The exiled creators were pardoned and allowed to return to their
original planet where they pleaded the case of their magnificent
creation. As a result, everyone on the distant planet fixed their eyes
on the Earth because it was inhabited by people they had themselves
created.
But among the humans who had been dispersed on Earth, a few
nursed the desire for vengeance, so they gathered in the towns of
Sodom and Gomorrah and, having managed to salvage a few
scientific secrets, they prepared an expedition aimed at punishing
those who had tried to destroy them. Consequently, the creators sent
two spies to investigate what was going on:
3

And there came two angels to Sodom at even . Genesis 19: 1.

Some humans tried to kill them, but the spies managed to blind their
attackers with a pocket atomic weapon:
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness, both small and great. Genesis 19: 11.

They warned those who were peaceful to leave the town because
they were going to destroy it with an atomic explosion:

23

INTELLIGENT DESIGN: MESSAGE FROM THE DESIGNERS

Up, get you out of this place; for Yahweh will destroy this city.
Genesis 19: 14.

As the people were leaving town, they were in no particular hurry
because they did not realize what an atomic explosion could mean.
Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all
the plain. Genesis 19: 17.

And the bomb fell on Sodom and Gomorrah:
Then Yahweh rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah
brimstone and fire from Yahweh out of heaven; And he overthrew
those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities,
and that which grew upon the ground. But his wife looked back
from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
Genesis 19: 24-26.

As you now know, burns caused by an atomic explosion kill those
who are too near and make them look like salt statues.’

The Sacrifice of Abraham
‘Later, after most of their leading intellectuals had been destroyed,
and they had relapsed into a semi-primitive state, the creators wished
to see if the people of Israel, and particularly their leader, still had
positive feelings towards them. This is related in the paragraph where
Abraham wants to sacrifice his own son. The creators tested him to
see if his feelings towards them were sufficiently strong. Fortunately,
the experiment ended positively.

24

T HE T RUTH - T HE S ACRIFICE O F A BRAHAM

Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto
him: for now I know that thou fearest Elohim. Genesis 22: 12.

There you have it. Assimilate it all and write down everything that
I have just told you. I will tell you more tomorrow.’
Once again the small man took leave of me, and his spacecraft rose
slowly into the air. Because the sky was clearer this time, I was able to
watch more closely as it took off. It hovered motionless at a height of
about 400 meters, then still without the slightest sound, the vessel
turned red as if it was heating up, then as white as white-hot metal,
and then finally a sort of bluish purple like an enormous spark, which
was impossible to look at. Then it disappeared completely.

25

3
WATCHING OVER THE CHOSEN PEOPLE

Moses

T

he following day I again met with my visitor, and he
immediately continued his story.
‘In Genesis, Chapter 28, there is another description of our
presence:
And behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached
to heaven: and behold the angels of Elohim ascending and
descending on it. Genesis 28: 12.

Because of the destruction of centers of progress such as Sodom
and Gomorrah and the elimination of the most intelligent
individuals, human beings had lapsed back into a very primitive state
and had begun, rather stupidly, to adore pieces of stone and idols,
forgetting those who had really created them:
Put away the foreign gods that are among you. Genesis 35: 2.

In Exodus, we appeared to Moses.
And the angel of Yahweh appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush
26

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - M OSES

burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
Exodus 3: 2.

A rocket landed in front of him, and his description corresponds
to what a Brazilian tribesman might say today if we were to land
before him in a flying vessel illuminating the trees without burning
them.
The people chosen as the most intelligent had lost their most
brilliant minds and had become slaves to neighboring tribes who
were more numerous since they had not undergone the same
destruction. It was thus necessary to restore dignity to the people of
Israel by returning their land to them.
The beginning of Exodus describes all that we had to do to help
liberate the people of Israel. Once departed, we guided them to the
country, which we had destined for them:
And Yahweh went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night. Exodus 13: 21.

In order to slow down the march of the Egyptians who had started
to pursue them:
The pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood
behind them... and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it
gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the
other all the night. Exodus 14: 19-20.

The smoke emitted behind the people of Israel made a curtain,
which slowed down their pursuers. Then the crossing of the water
was made possible by a repulsion beam, which cleared a passageway:

27

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And Yahweh caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all
that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided. Exodus 14: 21.
Thus Yahweh saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians. Exodus 14: 30.

While they were crossing the desert the chosen people began to feel
hungry:
Upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as
small as the hoar frost on the ground. Exodus 16: 14.

The manna was nothing more than pulverized synthetic chemical
food, which when spread on the ground, swelled with the early
morning dew.
As for the staff which allowed Moses to draw water from the rock,
as it says in Exodus 17:6 - it was nothing but a detector of
underground water pools similar to those which you use at present to
find oil, for example. Once the water is located, one has only to dig.
Then in Chapter 20 of Exodus a certain number of rules are cited.
Because the Israelites were so primitive, they needed laws regarding
morals and especially hygiene. These were outlined in the
commandments.
The creators came to dictate these laws to Moses on Mount Sinai,
and they arrived in a flying vessel:
And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount,
and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people
that was in the camp trembled... And mount Sinai was altogether
on a smoke, because Yahweh descended upon it in fire: and the
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole
mount quaked greatly. And when the voice of the trumpet
28

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - M OSES

sounded long, and waxed louder and louder. Moses spake, and
Elohim answered him by a voice. Exodus 19: 16-19.

The creators were afraid of being invaded or maltreated by human
beings. It was therefore essential that they be respected, even
venerated, so that they would be in no danger:
The people cannot come up to mount Sinai... but let not the
priests and the people break through to come up unto Yahweh,
lest he break forth upon them. Exodus 19: 23-24.

Also, it was written:
And Moses alone shall come near Yahweh: but they shall not
come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.
Exodus 24: 2.

They saw the God of Israel:
And there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire
stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.
Exodus 24: 10.

There you have the description of the pedestal upon which one of
the creators presented himself, and it was made of the same bluish
alloys as the floor of the machine in which we are now sitting.
And the sight of the glory of Yahweh was like devouring fire on
the top of the mount. Exodus 24: 17.

Here you have a description of “the glory” of the creators - in
reality, the flying vessel - and, as you have already noticed, upon takeoff it has a coloration similar to that of fire.
29

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

This team of creators was going to live on the Earth for some time,
and they wished to eat fresh food. That is why they asked the
Israelites to bring them fresh provisions regularly and also riches,
which they wanted to take back to their own planet. I suppose you
might call it colonization:
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering:
of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take
my offering. And this is the offering which ye shall take of them;
gold, and silver, and brass, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats’ hair. Exodus 25: 2-4.

They also decided that they would like to live more comfortably,
so they asked the human beings to build them a residence according
to plans they had drawn up. The plans are described in Chapter 26
of the Book of Exodus. In this residence they would meet the
representatives of the people. It was a meeting tent where people
brought food and gifts as a pledge of submission.
And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the
cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle
and Yahweh talked with Moses... And Yahweh spake unto Moses
face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. Exodus 33: 8-11.

Just as today I can speak to you as you can speak to me, man to
man.
Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and
live. Exodus 33: 20.

There you have reference to the difference in atmosphere between
our planets. Humans cannot see their creators unless the latter are
protected by a pressurized suit, because the terrestrial atmosphere is
30

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - M OSES

not suitable for them. If a man came to our planet he would see the
creators without a space suit, but he would die because the
atmosphere is not suitable for him.
The entire beginning of Leviticus explains how the foods offered to
the creators had to be brought to them for their replenishment. For
example, in Leviticus 21: 17 it says:
Whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any
4
blemish , let him not approach to offer the bread of his Elohim.

This is obviously to prevent sick or deformed people, who were
symbols of failure and therefore unbearable to the eyes of the creators,
from presenting themselves before them.
In the Book of Numbers 11:7-8 there is a very precise description of
the manna, which your chemists could very easily reproduce:
And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as
the colour of bdellium... and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh
oil.

This manna was nothing more than a chemical food, but the
creators preferred fresh fruits and vegetables:
And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
unto Yahweh, shall be thine. Numbers 18: 13.

Later, the creators taught human beings how to inject themselves
to treat snakebites:
Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come
to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it,
shall live. Numbers 21: 8.

31

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

As soon as someone was bitten, he “looked” at the “serpent of
brass”, that is to say, a syringe was brought to him, and he was
injected with serum.
Finally, the journey, which led the “chosen people” to the Promised
Land, came to an end. Following the advice of the creators, they
destroyed the idols of the local primitive people and took over their
territories:
Then ye shall... destroy all their molten images...and ye shall
dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein: for I
have given you the land to possess it. Numbers 33: 52-53.

The “chosen people” finally reached their Promised Land:
And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them. Deuteronomy 4: 37.

In the Book of Joshua, Chapter 3, Verses 15-16, we read about the
crossing of the Jordan:
And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan... the waters
which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap
very far from the city... and those that came down toward the sea
of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the
people passed over right against Jericho.

Thus the creators helped the “chosen people” cross without getting
their feet wet, just as they had done in their escape from the
Egyptians by using the same water repulsion ray.’

32

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE T RUMPETS

OF

J ERICHO

The Trumpets of Jericho
‘At the end of Chapter 5 in the Book of Joshua, there is a meeting
between a military creator and the chosen people regarding the
resistance of the city of Jericho.
5

But as captain of the host of Yahweh am I now come.
Joshua 5: 14.

A military consultant was sent to the Jewish people to assist them
in the siege of Jericho. It is easy to understand how the walls were
knocked down. You know that the very high voice of a singer can
crack a crystal glass. By using highly amplified ultrasonic waves, one
can knock down any concrete wall. This is what was done using a
very complicated instrument, which the Bible calls a “trumpet”:
When they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when ye
hear the sound of the trumpet... and the wall of the city shall fall
down flat. Joshua 6: 5.

At a given moment, the ultrasounds were emitted in a
synchronized way, and the walls fell down. A little later, some real
bombing took place:
Yahweh cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto
Azekah, and they died: they were more which died with
hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the
sword. Joshua 10: 11.

This full scale bombing, as indicated, killed more people than the
swords of the Israelites. One of the most distorted passages is in
Joshua, Chapter 10, Verse 13, where it is stated:
33

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had
avenged themselves upon their enemies.

This simply means that it was a flash war, which lasted only one
day – in fact, it is stated later that the war occupied “about a whole
day”. It was so short, when you consider the extent of the land
conquered, that people thought the sun had stood still.
In the Book of Judges, Chapter 6, Verse 21, one of the creators is
again in contact with a man called Gideon who delivers food to him:
Then the angel of Yahweh put forth the end of the staff that was
in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. Then the angel of Yahweh departed out of his
sight.

The creators were unable to eat in the open air because of their
pressurized suits, but if necessary, using a scientific technique, they
could feed themselves by extracting the essentials from these offerings
using a flexible tube or cane. The process radiates flames, which made
people at the time think sacrifices to God were being made.
In Chapter 7 of the Book of Judges, 300 men with “trumpets”
surrounded the enemy camp, and using highly amplified ultrasonic
instruments, they blew them simultaneously in order to drive all the
people in the camp mad. You know now that certain high pitched
sounds carried to extremes can drive anyone mad.
Indeed the people who had been surrounded went mad; the
soldiers killed each other and ran away.’

34

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - S AMSON

THE

T ELEPATHIST

Samson the Telepathist
‘In Judges, Chapter 13, there is yet another example of mating taking
place between the creators and human women:
And the angel of Yahweh appeared unto the woman, and said
unto her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou
shalt conceive, and bear a son. Judges 13: 3.

It was necessary that the fruit of this union be healthy so that the
behavior of the child could be studied. This is why he tells her:
And drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean
thing: for, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor
shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto
Elohim from the womb. Judges 13: 4-5.

Later, it is written:
And the angel of Elohim came again unto the woman as she sat
in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her.
Judges 13: 9.

It is easy to imagine what happened during her husband’s
absence... It was an easy task for the scientists to cure her sterility. In
this way she was made aware that she was going to give birth to an
exceptional individual, and that she should take the utmost care of
her baby. It was wonderful for the creators to mate with a daughter
of humanity. This enabled them to have sons ruling directly on Earth,
where the atmosphere was not suitable for themselves.
The point about not shaving off any hair is very important. The
human brain is like a huge transmitter, capable of sending out a
35

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

multitude of very accurate waves and thoughts. In fact, telepathy is
nothing more than that.
But this type of transmitter requires antennae, and the hair and
beard are these antennae. That is why you should not shave off any
hair if you want to make use of your transmitters. You have surely
noticed that many of your scientists have long hair, and often a beard.
Prophets and other wise people have them too. Now you can
understand why.
The child was born. It was Samson, whose story you know. He was
able to communicate directly with “God” by telepathy, thanks to his
natural antennae - his hair. And the creators could then help him
during difficult moments and produce marvels to reinforce his
authority.
But when Delilah cut his hair, he could no longer ask for help.
Then his eyes were gouged out by his enemies, but when his hair
grew again, he regained his “strength”. That is to say, he could once
again ask for help from the creators who then demolished the temple
where he was touching the columns. All of this was attributed to
Samson’s strength.
In Samuel, Chapter 3, we find Elijah initiating Samuel into
telepathy. The creators wanted to contact Samuel, and he thinks that
Elijah is speaking to him. He “hears voices”:
Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he call thee, that thou shalt say,
Speak, Yahweh; for thy servant heareth. 1 Samuel 3: 9.

This is a little like the behavior of amateur radio operators who
might say, “Go ahead, I can hear you loud and clear”. And the
telepathic conversation begins:
‘Samuel, Samuel.’ Then Samuel answered, ‘Speak; for thy servant
heareth.’ 1 Samuel 3: 10-11.

36

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - S AMSON T HE T ELEPATHIST

In the episode where David challenges Goliath there is quite an
interesting sentence which ends:
...that he should defy the armies of the living Elohim?
1 Samuel 17: 26.

This shows the reality of the presence in that epoch of a quite
tangible “God”. Telepathy as a means of communication between the
creators and human beings was only possible when the Elohim were
in proximity to the Earth.
When they were on their distant planet, or elsewhere, they could
not communicate in this way.
For this reason they set up a transmitter-receiver, which was
transported in the “Ark of God” - an apparatus containing its own
atomic powered cell. This is why in the First Book of Samuel, Chapters
5 and 6, when the Philistines stole the Ark, their idol Dagon lay face
down on the ground nearby, as the result of an electrical discharge
caused by their clumsy mishandling of it.
They also suffered radiation burns from the dangerous radioactive
materials:
6

And smote them with emerods . 1 Samuel 5: 6.

Even the Jews who had not taken precautions while handling the
Ark were harmed:
Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of Elohim, and took hold of
it; for the oxen shook it. And the anger of Yahweh was kindled
against Uzzah; and Elohim smote him there for his error; and
there he died by the ark of Elohim. 2 Samuel 6: 6-7.

The Ark almost fell over and Uzzah, trying to hold it up, touched
a dangerous part of the machine and was electrocuted.
37

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

In the first book of Kings (1 Kings 1:50 and 1 Kings 2:28), we read
in several places of individuals who “caught hold on the horns of the
altar”.
This refers to the manipulation of the transmitter-receiver levers
while trying to communicate with the creators.’

The First Residence to Welcome the Elohim
‘The great King Solomon had a sumptuous residence built in order
to welcome the creators when they came to visit the Earth:
7

Yahweh said He would dwell in thick darkness . I have surely
built thee an house to dwell in. 1 Kings 8: 12-13.
For the glory of Yahweh had filled the house of Yahweh.
1 Kings 8: 11.
The cloud filled the house of Yahweh. 1 Kings 8: 10.
And I will dwell among the children of Israel. 1 Kings 6: 13.

So the creators lived in a cloud, or rather in a vessel that orbits
above the clouds. Imagine trying to make primitive people
understand that.
There came a man of Elohim out of Judah by the word of Yahweh
unto Bethel...and said...behold, the altar shall be rent. When king
Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of Elohim, which had cried
against the altar in Bethel, that he put forth his hand from the
altar, saying, ‘Lay hold on him.’ And his hand, which he put forth
against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to him.
1 Kings 13: 1-5.
38

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F IRST R ESIDENCE TO W ELCOME T HE E LOHIM

With the help of an atomic disintegrator, one of the creators
destroyed the altar and burned the hand of the man who did not
show respect for the creators. He returns to one of the Elohim’s
terrestrial camps by another route to keep their whereabouts secret:
So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he
came to Bethel. 1 Kings 13: 10.

In 1 Kings, Chapter 17, Verse 6, there is an example of the radio
control of animals through the use of electrodes, as you yourselves are
beginning to discover:
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening.

Because of recent discoveries, the creators decided to appear as
little as possible in order not to influence the destiny of Man too
much, so that they could see if they would reach the age of scientific
knowledge on their own. So, the creators began to use increasingly
discreet means of communicating with humans, as in the method of
feeding Elijah using “homing” ravens.
This was the beginning of a gigantic experiment throughout the
galaxy in which several humanities are in competition. The creators
decided to appear less often, while at the same time reinforcing the
authority and reputation of their ambassadors - the prophets - by
using miracles. That is to say, scientific means which were then
incomprehensible to the people of that era:
See, your son lives!... Now by this I know that you are a man of
12
God. 1 Kings 17: 23-24.

Elijah had healed a young child who was dying. Later, he ordered
two bull calves to be placed on logs at Mount Carmel, one to be
39

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

consecrated to the idol Baal and the other to the creators. The one
that would ignite by itself would represent the one true “God”.
Obviously, at a moment agreed upon in advance between Elijah
and the creators, the Elohim’s chosen log burst into flames, even
though the wood was wet. This was accomplished by a powerful
beam similar to a laser, emitted from a vessel hidden in the clouds:
Then the fire of Yahweh fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice,
and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the
water that was in the trench. 1 Kings 18: 38.’

Elijah the Messenger
‘The creators paid particular attention to Elijah.
Then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.
And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals,
and a cruse of water at his head. 1 Kings 19: 5-6.

All this happened in the desert...
And, behold, Yahweh passed by, and a great and strong wind rent
the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before Yahweh; but
Yahweh was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake;
but Yahweh was not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake
a fire; but Yahweh was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small
voice. 1 Kings 19: 11-12.

40

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - E LIJAH T HE M ESSENGER

There you have the exact description of a landing by a machine
similar to one of your rockets. Then further on, a vision of the
creators is described:
9

I saw Yahweh sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven
standing by him. 1 Kings 22: 19.

The creators once again used telepathy - this time group telepathy
– so that none of the prophets could predict the truth to the King:
I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.
1 Kings 22: 22.

In the Second Book of Kings, there is further evidence of the
protection, which the creators gave to Elijah:
If I be a man of Elohim, let fire come down from heaven, and
consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of Elohim came down
from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty. 2 Kings 1: 12.

This operation happened again, but the third time:
10

And the angel of Yahweh said unto Elijah , Go down with him.
2 Kings 1: 15.

In the Second Book of Kings, Chapter 2, Elijah is invited onto a
spacecraft, which takes off with him on board:
When Yahweh would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind.
2 Kings 2: 1.
There appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted

41

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven. 2 Kings 2: 11.

This is a spacecraft taking off, and when the narrator speaks of
horses of fire, he is referring to the fire, which was emitted from the
blast pipes. If you showed certain South American or African tribes
people a rocket taking off, they would be incapable of understanding
this scientific phenomenon in a rational way, and would look upon it
as something supernatural, mystical, and divine. When returning to
their tribes, they would speak of chariots of fire and horses of fire.
Further on in the Second Book of Kings, Chapter 4, Verses 32-7
Elisha, like his father, performs a resurrection. He heals and brings
back to life a child who was dead. This happens quite frequently
nowadays when mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage
revive a person whose cardiac muscle has ceased to function.
Then Elisha proceeds to multiply the bread.’

The Multiplication of Bread
‘A man... brought the man of Elohim bread of the firstfruits,
twenty loaves of barley... And his servitor said, What, should I set
this before an hundred men?... He said again, Give the people,
that they may eat: for thus saith Yahweh, They shall eat, and shall
leave thereof. So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left
thereof, according to the word of Yahweh. 2 Kings 4: 42-44.

The creators had brought synthetic dehydrated food with them,
which when added to water, increased to five times its original
volume. So with twenty small loaves of bread there was enough food
for a hundred people.
42

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE M ULTIPLICATION

OF

B READ

You are already familiar with the little vitamin pills, which
nourished your first astronauts. They take up very little space but
contain all the necessary nutritional elements. One pill is enough to
feed one person. A quantity equivalent in volume to one small loaf of
bread is enough to feed five people. Therefore twenty loaves are
sufficient to feed one hundred people.
But the people of Israel had begun adoring metal idols; they had
also become cannibals and were completely immoral, much to the
disgust of their creators:
So was Israel carried away out of their own land. 2 Kings 17: 23.

That was the beginning of the dispersion of the Israelites whose
civilization, instead of making progress, was constantly regressing, in
contrast to their neighbors, who took advantage of the situation.
In the Book of Isaiah you again find:
In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also Yahweh sitting upon
a throne, high and lifted up... Above it stood the seraphims: each
one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain
he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. Isaiah 6: 1-2.

That is a description of the creators dressed in their one piece space
suits fitted with six small jet engines, two on their backs, two on their
hands, and two at their feet, these ones for steering purposes.
The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great
people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together: Yahweh of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. They
come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even Yahweh,
and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.
Isaiah 13: 4-5.

43

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The whole truth is encapsulated in that quote, it is just a matter of
reading between the lines in order to understand. They come from a
far country, from the end of heaven. That could not be clearer.
For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will
exalt my throne above the stars of Elohim. Isaiah 14: 13.

This refers to the human scientists who had accumulated sufficient
knowledge to undertake a trip to the creators’ planet but were
destroyed at Sodom and Gomorrah. The army of the heavens is
described here at that time when they arrived with the weapons of
wrath to destroy the whole country. It was those human scientists of
Sodom and Gomorrah who said:
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the
most high. Isaiah 14: 14.

But the destruction prevented humans from equaling their
creators, “the most high”:
27

That made the world as a wilderness . Isaiah 14: 17.

The nuclear explosion is described further on:
For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling
thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim. For
the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood... Isaiah 15: 8-9.

A few were saved because they sheltered in bunkers:
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until
the indignation be overpast. Isaiah 26: 20.’
44

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F LYING S AUCERS

OF

E ZEKIEL

The Flying Saucers of Ezekiel
‘It is in the Book of Ezekiel, that we find the most interesting
description of one of our flying machines:
I looked, and, behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a
great cloud, with flashing lightning, and a brightness round about
it, and out of the midst of it as it were glowing metal, out of the
midst of the fire. Out of the midst of it came the likeness of four
living creatures. This was their appearance: they had the likeness
of a man. Everyone had four faces, and everyone of them had four
wings. Their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like burnished
brass. They had the hands of a man under their wings on their
four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings [thus]:
their wings were joined one to another; they didn't turn when
they went; they went everyone straight forward.
As for the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man; and
they four had the face of a lion on the right side; and they four
had the face of an ox on the left side; they four had also the face
of an eagle. Their faces and their wings were separate above; two
[wings] of everyone were joined one to another, and two covered
their bodies. They went everyone straight forward: where the
spirit was to go, they went; they didn't turn when they went. As
for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like
burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches: [the fire]
went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was
bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. The living
creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of
lightning.
Now as I saw the living creatures, behold, one wheel on the eretz
beside the living creatures, for each of the four faces of it.
45

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The appearance of the wheels and their work was like a bareket:
and they four had one likeness; and their appearance and their
work was as it were a wheel within a wheel. When they went, they
went in their four directions: they didn't turn when they went. As
for their rims, they were high and dreadful; and they four had
their rims full of eyes round about. When the living creatures
went, the wheels went beside them; and when the living creatures
were lifted up from the eretz, the wheels were lifted up. Wherever
the spirit was to go, they went; there was the spirit to go: and the
wheels were lifted up beside them; for the spirit of the living
creature was in the wheels. When those went, these went; and
when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up
from the eretz, the wheels were lifted up beside them: for the
spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
Over the head of the living creature there was the likeness of an
expanse, like the awesome crystal to look on, stretched forth over
their heads above. Under the expanse were their wings straight,
the one toward the other: everyone had two which covered on
this side, and every one had two which covered on that side, their
bodies. When they went, I heard the noise of their wings like the
noise of great waters, like the voice of Shaddai, a noise of tumult
like the noise of a host: when they stood, they let down their
wings. There was a voice above the expanse that was over their
heads: when they stood, they let down their wings. Above the
expanse that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as
the appearance of a sappir stone; and on the likeness of the throne
11
was a likeness as the appearance of a man on it above.
Ezekiel 1: 4-26.

There you have a description, which could not be more precise, of
the creators who had come out of their flying machines. The “stormy
wind” is the trace of smoke or vapor trail that present-day planes leave
behind them at high altitudes. Then the machine appeared with its
blinking light, the “flashing lightning” and “glowing metal”. Later,
46

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F LYING S AUCERS

OF

E ZEKIEL

four creators appear wearing antigravity suits with small directional
jet engines attached. These are described as the “wings” on their metal
suits and “their feet... sparkled like burnished brass”. You have surely
noticed how shiny the suits of your astronauts are.
As for the “flying saucers” or “wheels”, their appearance and their
operation were not at all badly described considering it is a primitive
person who is speaking. “as it were a wheel within a wheel...they
didn't turn when they went”.
In the center of the flying saucer, very similar to the one in which
we are now sitting, was the habitable section - the rim. “they four had
their rims full of eyes round about”. In the same way that our
clothing has evolved and we no longer wear those cumbersome space
suits, our vessels then had portholes - the “eyes” around the rims because we had not then discovered how to see through metallic walls
by modifying their atomic structure at will.
The flying saucers stayed near the creators ready to help them if the
need arose, since they were loading supplies and carrying out routine
maintenance on the large intergalactic vessel above them. Other
creators inside the vessels were directing them. “...for the spirit of the
living creature was in the wheels”. This is quite clear.
The suit described with its four portholes was similar to your first
diving suits. “Everyone had four faces... they didn't turn when they
went”.
The smaller saucers were something like your own LEMs - lunar
excursion modules - small, short range vehicles used for exploratory
missions. Above them the larger interplanetary vessel waited.
Above the expanse that was over their heads was the likeness of a
throne, as the appearance of a sappir stone; and on the likeness of
the throne was a likeness as the appearance of a man on it above.
Ezekiel 1: 26.

The latter individual on the large vessel was supervising and
coordinating the work of the creators.
47

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Frightened by all this, Ezekiel fell flat on his face before these
things, which were so mysterious that they had to have come from no
one other than “God”. But one of the creators said to him:
Son of man, stand on your feet, and I will speak with you... hear
what I tell you... and eat that which I give you.
Ezekiel 2: 1 and 7-8.

This is an image, like the eating from the tree of science of good
and evil. It was intellectual food that he was given. In this case, it was
a book:
There was a hand stretched out to me; and behold, a scroll of a
book was in it... there was writing on the inside and on the
12
outside. Ezekiel 2: 9-10.

There was writing on both sides, a very surprising thing at that
time when usually only one side of parchment was written on.
Then the scroll is “eaten”. This means that Ezekiel absorbed its
meaning. What he learned is what you are learning now about
humanity’s origins. It was so exciting and comforting that he said:
Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
Ezekiel 3: 3.

Then Ezekiel is transported in the creators’ vessel to the place
where he was to spread the news:
Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing. Ezekiel 3: 12.

Further on, the prophet is transported once again in a flying
machine:
48

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F LYING S AUCERS

OF

E ZEKIEL

...and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven,
and brought me in the visions of Elohim to Jerusalem.
Ezekiel 8: 3.

Ezekiel noticed afterwards that beneath their “wings” the
cherubims had hands like humans:
And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man’s hand
under their wings. Ezekiel 10: 8.
And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from
the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were
beside them... Ezekiel 10: 19.
Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me... Ezekiel 11: 1.
And the glory of Yahweh went up from the midst of the city, and
stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.
Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by
the Spirit of Elohim into Chaldea... Ezekiel 11: 23-24.

There you have some of the many journeys of Ezekiel in one of the
creators’ flying machines.
The hand of Yahweh was upon me, and carried me out in the
spirit of Yahweh, and set me down in the midst of the valley
which was full of bones. Ezekiel 37: 1.

Here a miracle is about to happen. The creators go on to resurrect
human beings whose only remains are their bones.
As mentioned earlier, each particle of a living being contains all the
information to reconstruct it completely. All you have to do is place
one of these particles, for example from bone remains, in a machine,

49

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

which provides all the living matter required to reconstruct that
original being.
The machine supplies the matter, and the particle supplies all the
required information, the blue-print according to which the being
will be built, just as a spermatozoon contains all the information
necessary to create a living being in the first place, right down to the
color of the hair and eyes.
Son of man, can these bones live?... there was a noise, and behold
a shaking... the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the
skin covered them above... and they lived, and stood up upon
their feet, an exceeding great army. Ezekiel 37: 3-10.

All this is very easy to do, and you will do it some day. This is the
origin of the ancient rituals in which elaborately protective sepulchers
were built to bury great people, so that one day, they may be brought
back to life everlasting. This is part of the secret of the “tree of life” the secret of eternity.
In Chapter 40, Ezekiel is again carried away in a spacecraft, which
takes him into the presence of someone wearing a space suit:
Brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very
high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city on the south.
And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose
appearance was like the appearance of brass... Ezekiel 40: 2-3.

This “city” is one of the Earth bases that the creators used at that
time. They were always located on very high mountains so that the
creators would not be disturbed by humans. The man “whose
appearance was the appearance of brass” is, of course, wearing a
metallic suit. Similarly, due to our small stature, we were often
mistaken for children or cherubs.
The priests in serving the creators in their terrestrial residence – the
temple visited by Ezekiel - wore aseptic clothing when performing
50

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F LYING S AUCERS

OF

E ZEKIEL

their duties, and those clothes always had to remain in the temple to
avoid being contaminated by germs dangerous to the creators:
When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the
holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
garments wherein they minister; for they are holy.
Ezekiel 42:14

They should have written, “for these garments are pure or sterile”,
but that was incomprehensible for primitive people who deified all
that was told or shown to them at that period.
In Ezekiel Chapter 43, the big vessel, respectfully called “the glory
of God”, approached.
The glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east. His
voice was like the sound of many waters; and the earth shone with
12
His glory. Ezekiel, 43: 2.

The creators did not want to be disturbed, so they issued a
directive:
This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall
enter in by it; because Yahweh, the Elohim of Israel, hath entered
in by it, therefore it shall be shut. Ezekiel 44: 2.

Only a “prince” is allowed to come and speak with the creators:
It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before
Yahweh. Ezekiel 44: 3.

But the prince had to pass through a chamber where he was
disinfected by special rays:

51

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

He shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go
out by the way of the same. Ezekiel 44: 3.

The Levite priests were there to look after the creators:
They shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood... and they
shall come near to my table, to minister unto me...
Ezekiel 44: 15-16.

The odor of human perspiration was very unpleasant to the
creators:
When they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be
clothed with linen garments... they shall not gird themselves with
any thing that causeth sweat. Ezekiel 44: 17-18.

There is a description also of how the Elohim’s supply of fresh
products continued:
The first of all the firstfruits... ye shall also give unto the priest the
first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine
house. Ezekiel 44: 30.

In Chapter 3 of the Book of Daniel, King Nebuchadnezzar
condemned three men to the stake for refusing to worship a metal
god instead of the creators, whom he knew existed. But the three men
were saved by one of the creators who came to their aid in the
glowing fire, armed with a repellent and refrigerative ray. He
protected them from the heat and the flames with this and allowed
them to walk away totally unscathed:

52

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE F LYING S AUCERS

OF

E ZEKIEL

Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they
have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of
Elohim. Daniel 3: 25.

Further on, Daniel is cast into the lions’ den, but the lions do not
harm him. There again, nothing too complicated was involved, just a
paralyzing beam to give enough time to get Daniel out of the den
unharmed:
My Elohim hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths.
Daniel 6: 22.

In the tenth chapter of Daniel, you will find another interesting
description of a creator:
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain
man... His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the
appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms
and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his
words like the voice of a multitude. Daniel 10: 5-6.’

The Last Judgement
‘If the Hebrew people were dominated by the Persians and the
Greeks, it was because of their lack of faith. Consequently, the
Elohim punished the Hebrews by sending some of their “angels”
amongst the Persians and Greeks to help those nations to progress
technologically.
This explains the great moments in the history of those two
civilizations. The archangel Michael was the leader of the delegation,
which was helping the Persians:
53

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I
remained there with the kings of Persia. Daniel 10: 13.

In Chapter 12 of Daniel, the resurrection is again mentioned:
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt. Daniel 12: 2.

The “Last Judgement” will enable great individuals to live again.
Those people who have acted positively for humanity and who have
truly believed in their creators and followed their commandments
will be welcomed with great joy by the people of the era when this
will happen.
On the other hand, all the wicked people will feel shame before
their judges and will live in eternal regret, as an example for the rest
of humanity:
And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars
for ever and ever. Daniel 12: 3.

The geniuses will be the most highly esteemed and the most highly
rewarded. Those just individuals, who allowed the geniuses to
blossom, or the truth to triumph, will also be rewarded.
Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of
the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased. Daniel 12: 4.

These words will only be understood when humanity has reached
a sufficient level of scientific understanding - that is to say, now. All
this will happen:
54

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE L AST J UDGEMENT

and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the
holy people, all these things shall be finished. Daniel 12: 7.

This will be when the people of Israel recover their land after
their long Diaspora. The state of Israel was created a few decades
ago, at the same time as the explosion of humanity’s scientific
knowledge.
Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed till the
time of the end. Daniel 12: 9.

All this will only be understood in this epoch. In recent years
scientific progress and the beginning of space exploration by human
beings have been such that everything seems possible for humanity.
Nothing surprises people anymore, for they are used to seeing many
wonders happening before their eyes on television. They can learn
without astonishment that they really are made in the image of
“God”, their almighty creator, and even as far as their scientific
abilities are concerned. These days, miracles have become
comprehensible.
In Jonah, the big fish that swallows the prophet is very interesting
indeed. After Jonah was thrown into the water from a small boat:
Now Yahweh had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
Jonah 1: 17.

The “great fish” was in reality a submarine, as you know such
vessels now. But for the people of that time, it could only be a great
fish, even though the gastric juices of such a fish would have digested
a man quickly without any hope of his returning to the open air.
What is more, Jonah would have needed air to breathe. In the
submarine, the creators were able to carry on a conversation with
Jonah to learn about the political developments of those times.
55

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And Yahweh spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon
the dry land. Jonah 2: 10.

The submarine came close to the shore, and Jonah was back on
land. In Zechariah, Chapter 5, there is another description of a flying
machine:
Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold
a flying roll... the length thereof is twenty cubits (9 meters) and
the breadth thereof ten cubits (4.5 meters). Zechariah 5: 1-2.

A little further on, women amongst the creators appear for the first
time:
Behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their
wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork...
Zechariah 5: 9.

These two female companions were accompanying the creators
and both were equipped with autonomous flying suits when they
appeared before Zechariah.
In Psalms 8, Verse 5, it is said of human beings:
13

For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels .

Human beings are virtually as strong intellectually as their creators.
Those who copied out the texts did not dare write “equal” to the
Elohim as it had been originally dictated.
His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto
the ends of it. Psalms 19: 6.

56

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - T HE L AST J UDGEMENT

The creators came from a planet very far away from the Earth’s
orbit.
In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun. Psalms 19: 4.

Here is another allusion to the mass of Earth, which was created to
form the original continent when the oceans covered the Earth.
Yahweh looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men.
From the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the
inhabitants of the earth. Psalms 33: 13-14.

The creators watch humanity’s behavior as they always have done
from their flying vessels.’

Satan
‘In the Book of Job, Chapter 1, you have the explanation of Satan:
Now there was a day when the sons of Elohim came to present
themselves before Yahweh, and Satan came also among them.
Job 1: 6.

Elohim in Hebrew literally means “those who came from the sky”.
The “sons of Elohim”, in other words, the creators who watch human
beings, report regularly to their planet of origin, indicating for the
most part that human beings venerate and love the Elohim. But one
of these Elohim, called Satan, was part of a group, which had always
condemned the creation of other intelligent beings on a planet as
close as the Earth, seeing them as a possible threat. That is why, on

57

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

seeing Job’s devotion, which was one of the best examples of human
beings loving their creators, he said:
Doth Job fear Elohim for nought?... But put forth thine hand
now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face.
And Yahweh said unto Satan, ‘Behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand.’
Job 1: 9-12.

Hearing Satan’s assertion that had Job not been rich, he would not
have loved his creators, the government gave full power to Satan to
ruin Job. It would then be seen if he still venerated his creators, and
that is why killing him was forbidden.
On seeing Job’s dedication to respecting his creators, even when he
was ruined, the government triumphed over the opposition, Satan.
But Satan retorted that though Job had lost many things, he was still
in good health. So the government gave Satan carte blanche so long as
he did not kill Job:
Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life. Job 2: 6.

Again, in the Book of Job, a small sentence in Chapter 37 is very
interesting:
With Him, have you spread out the skies, Strong as a cast metal
14
mirror? Job 37: 18

In other words, are human beings capable of making a “cast metal
mirror”- in reality flying metallic vessels? People of that time thought
it was possible for no one but God. And yet today it can be done.
Finally, in view of Job’s humility, the creators healed him and gave
him back his wealth, his children and his health.’

58

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - H UMANS C OULD N OT U NDERSTAND

Humans Could Not Understand
‘In the Book of Tobit in the Apocryhpha, one of the creators’ robots
named Raphael also came to test humanity’s reaction towards its
creators.
Once he had accomplished his mission, he left, after proving who
he was:
All these days I did appear unto you; but I did neither eat nor
drink... for I go up to him that sent me; but write all things which
are done in a book. Tobit 12: 19-20.

All of this is easy to see in the writings. But once again you must
try to understand.
As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came up, I will tell you,
and will not hide mysteries from you: but will seek her out from
the beginning of her nativity, and bring the knowledge of her into
light, and will not pass over the truth. Wisdom of Solomon 6: 22.

When the time comes, “wisdom”, the science, which allowed all
this to happen, will be known by Man. The biblical writings will be
proof of all this.
For by the greatness and beauty of the creatures proportionably
the maker of them is seen. Wisdom of Solomon 13: 5.

So it is simple to see the truth, recognizing the creators by
observing their creations.
And could not out of the good things that are seen know him that
is. Wisdom of Solomon 13: 1.
59

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

To avoid being disturbed by humans, the creators built their bases
on high mountains, where we now find traces of great civilizations (in
the Himalayas and Peru, for example), as well as at the bottom of the
sea. Gradually the mountain stations were abandoned in favor of
submarine bases less accessible to humans. The creators who had been
banished at the outset had hidden themselves in the oceans.
In that day Yahweh with his sore and great and strong sword shall
punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked
serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.
Isaiah 27: 1.

At that time the government of their planet wanted to destroy
those who had created the humans.
It was not easy to see clearly among all those wonders, so of course,
the creators were deified and made into something abstract because
human beings were unable to understand scientific facts.
And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read
this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. Isaiah 29: 12.

For a long time, humanity has held the truth in its hands but could
not understand until it was sufficiently evolved scientifically to
decode it.
15

Every man is brutish in his knowledge ... Jeremiah 10: 14.

Science enabled the creators to create and will enable human
beings to do the same.
Yahweh possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works
of old.I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever
the earth was... When he prepared the heavens, I was there...
60

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - H UMANS C OULD N OT U NDERSTAND

When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not
pass his commandment... Then I was by him, as one brought up
with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;
Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were
with the sons of men. Proverbs 8: 22-23, 27, 29 -31.

Intelligence and science, these are the two virtues that enabled the
creators to create the landmass - the single continent - and the living
beings they placed upon it. And now this intelligence and this spirit
leads the human brain to repeat the acts of their creators.
Since the beginning of time it has been so: people create other
people like themselves on other planets. The cycle continues. Some
die, others take over. We are your creators, and you will create other
humanities:
That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
been. Ecclesiastes 3: 15.

The animals were also created and will be recreated. Just like
human beings, no more, no less. The species that disappear will live
again when you know how to recreate them:
So that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity.
Ecelesiastes 3: 19.

We, the creators, will only show ourselves officially if humanity is
grateful to us for having created them. We fear that human beings
might hold a grudge against us, which we cannot accept.
We would like to begin making open contact with you and give
you the benefit of our considerable advance in scientific knowledge so long as we could be sure that you would not turn against us, and
that you would love us as your parents.

61

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker!... Shall the clay say
to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He
hath no hands? Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What
begettest thou? Isaiah 45: 9-10.

Fear of not being loved by human beings has led your creators to
allow you to progress scientifically by yourselves, with almost no help.
The emblem you see engraved on this machine and on my suit
represents the truth. It is also the emblem of the Jewish people, the
Star of David, which means: “That which is above is like that which
is below”, and in its center is the swastika, which means that
everything is cyclic, the top becoming the bottom, and the bottom in
turn becoming the top. The origins and destiny of the creators and
human beings are similar and linked.
Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the
foundations of the earth? Isaiah 40: 21.

The traces of the creators’ bases on high mountains is mentioned
in the Book of Amos:
He that... treadeth upon the high places of the earth.
Amos 4: 13.

The creators had seven bases in all:
Those seven; they are the eyes of Yahweh, which run to and fro
through the whole earth. Zechariah 4: 10.

This is the origin of the seven-branched candlestick, the meaning
of which has been lost. In the beginning at the creators’ headquarters,
there was a switchboard with seven lighted switches enabling them to
62

WATCHING OVER

THE

C HOSEN P EOPLE - H UMANS C OULD N OT U NDERSTAND

stay in contact with the other bases and with the interplanetary vessel
orbiting the Earth.
In Psalms, 139:4-6, there is an allusion to telepathy:
For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Yahweh, thou
knowest it altogether. Thou hast beset me behind and before, and
laid thine hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for
me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

At that time telepathy was unimaginable, hence “such knowledge
is too wonderful for me”. Astronomy and interplanetary journeys
were also unthinkable at the time:
He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their
names. Great is our Yahweh, and of great power: his
understanding is infinite. Psalms 147: 4-5.

Human beings were also unable to understand telecommunication:
He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word
runneth very swiftly. Psalms 147: 15.

We now reach a decisive turning point in the creators’ work. They
decided at that period to let humanity progress scientifically without
ever intervening directly. They understood that they themselves had
been created in the same way, and that by creating similar beings to
themselves, they were allowing the cycle to continue.
But first, in order for the truth to be spread throughout the world,
they decided to send a Messiah who would be able to communicate
worldwide what the people of Israel were then the only ones to know.
This was in preparation for the day when the original mystery would

63

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

be explained in the light of scientific progress - that is to say, the
revelation. So they announced him:
But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me
that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of
old, from everlasting... And he shall stand and feed in the strength
of Yahweh... for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.
And this man shall be the peace. Micah 5: 2-5.
shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto
thee...lowly, and riding upon an ass... and he shall speak peace
unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea.
Zechariah 9: 9-10.’

64

4
THE ROLE OF CHRIST

The Conception

T

he next morning, we met again at the same spot, and my host
said: ‘Christ’s role was to spread the truth of the biblical
scriptures throughout the world, so that they could serve as proof for
all of humanity when the age of science would finally explain
everything. The creators therefore decided to arrange for a child to be
born of a woman of the Earth and one of their own people. The child
in question would thereby inherit certain telepathic faculties, which
humans lack:
She was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Matthew 1: 18.

Mary was the woman chosen, and obviously her fiance found these
tidings hard to accept, but:
Behold, the angel of Yahweh appeared unto him. Matthew 1:20.

One of the creators appeared to explain that Mary would bring
forth a son of “God”. The prophets, who were in contact with the
creators, came from very far away to see the divine child. One of the
spacecrafts of the creators guided them:

65

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

We have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him...
the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came
and stood over where the young child was. Matthew 2: 2 and 9.

The creators watched over the child:
The angel of Yahweh appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying,
Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into
Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will
seek the young child to destroy him. Matthew 2: 13.

The king was not too happy about the child-king coming from the
people on his territory, which was announced to him by the prophets.
But after King Herod died, the creators told Joseph that he could
return to Israel:
But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of Yahweh appeareth
in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, Saying, Arise, and take the young
child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are
dead which sought the young child’s life. Matthew 2: 19-20.’

The Initiation
‘When he came of age, Jesus was led to the creators, so that they
could reveal to him his true identity, introduce him to his father,
reveal his mission and make known to him various scientific
techniques.
The heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of
Yahweh descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: And lo a
66

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - T HE I NITIATION

voice from heaven, saying, ‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I
16
am well pleased.’ Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted of the devil..
Matthew 3: 16-17 and 4: 1.

The devil, “Satan”, the creator of whom we spoke previously, was
always convinced that nothing good could come of humanity on
Earth. He was “Satan the skeptic”, and he was supported by the
government’s opposition on our distant planet.
So he tested Jesus to find out if his intelligence was positive, and if
he really loved and respected his creators. Having discovered that they
could place complete confidence in Jesus, Jesus was allowed to go and
accomplish his mission.
In order to rally people to him, Jesus performed “miracles”, which
in reality, were the application of scientific teachings shown to him by
the creators:
And they brought unto him all sick people... and he healed them.
Matthew 4: 24.
Blessed are the poor in spirit. Matthew 5: 3.

This sentence has been incorrectly interpreted as “the poor are
blessed”. But the original meaning was that if the poor have spirit,
then they will be happy - which is totally different.
Then Jesus told his apostles that they must spread the truth
throughout the world. In the prayer called the “Lord’s Prayer” or the
“Our Father”, the truth is stated literally:
8

Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Matthew 6: 10.

In “heaven”, on the creators’ planet, the scientists eventually
became the ruling group and then created other intelligent beings.
67

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The same thing will happen on Earth. The torch will be taken up
again.
This prayer, which has been repeated time and time again without
anyone understanding its profound meaning, now takes on its full
significance: On Earth, as it is in heaven.
Amongst other things, Jesus had been taught to speak convincingly
through a type of telepathic group hypnosis:
And so it was, when Jesus had ended these sayings, that the
people were astonished at His teaching, for He taught them as
12
one having authority, and not as the scribes.
Matthew 7: 28-29.

He continued to heal the sick with the help of the creators who
directed concentrated beams from a distance:
A leper came and worshiped Him, saying, "Lord, if You are
willing, You can make me clean.Then Jesus put out His hand and
touched him, saying, ‘I am willing; be cleansed.’ Immediately his
12
leprosy was cleansed. Matthew 8: 2-3.

And he did the same for a man who was completely paralyzed. The
operation was carried out from a distance using a concentrated ray,
something like a laser, which burns only one spot through several
layers:
Arise, take up thy bed... And he arose. Matthew 9: 6-8.

Further on in St. Matthew’s Gospel, Jesus announced his mission:
17

For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners. Matthew 9: 13.

68

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - T HE I NITIATION

He did not come for the people of Israel, who knew of the
existence of the creators, but rather, so that this knowledge would be
spread throughout the rest of the world.
Later there were more “miracles”, somewhat similar to the first
ones, all of which were medical. Nowadays there are transplants of
hearts and other organs; leprosy and other similar illnesses are cured,
and people are brought out of a coma with appropriate care. These
would be considered miracles by technologically primitive people. At
that time human beings were primitive, and the creators were similar
to people of your present “civilized” nations, although a little more
advanced scientifically.
Further on we find an allusion to the creators among whom is
Jesus’ real father:
Every one therefore who shall confess me before men, him will I
17
also confess before my Father who is in heaven.
Matthew 10: 32.
26

Before my Father who is in heaven - this says it all. In fact, “God”
is not intangible or immaterial. He is “in heaven”. This is obviously
incomprehensible to people who, at the time, believed that the stars
were attached to a heavenly canopy just like pretty light bulbs, all
rotating around the center of the world - the Earth. Now, since the
advent of space travel and an understanding of the immensity of the
universe, the old texts are brought to light in a completely different
way.’

Parallel Humanities
‘In St. Matthew’s Gospel, Chapter 13, there is an important passage
where Jesus explains in a parable how the creators left their planet to
create life on other worlds:
69

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Behold, a sower went forth to sow; And when he sowed, some
seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them
up: Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth:
and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of
earth: And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because
they had no root, they withered away. And some fell among
thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them: But other
fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an
hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to
hear, let him hear. Matthew 13: 3-9.

All this is an allusion to the various attempts to create life on other
planets - and three of them failed.
The first failed because of the birds, which came and ate the seeds.
In fact, this was a failure caused by the proximity of the planet in
question to the creators’ original planet. Those who were against the
creation of people similar to themselves saw a possible threat in the
experiment and therefore went to destroy the creation.
The second attempt was made on a planet too near a sun that was
too hot; therefore, their creation was destroyed by noxious radiation.
The third attempt was made “among thorns” on a planet, which
was far too humid, where the plant life was so powerful that it
destroyed the equilibrium and the animal world. This world
consisting only of plants still exists.
But the fourth attempt was finally successful on “good ground”.
And it is important to note that there were in fact three successes in
all. This means that on two other planets, which are relatively near to
you, there are living beings similar to yourselves who were created by
the same creators.
“Who hath ears to hear, let him hear”; those who are able,
understand. When the time comes, those who seek to understand will
do so. The others, those who look without really seeing, and hear
without really listening or understanding, such people will not
understand the truth. On the other hand, those who prove their
70

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - PARALLEL H UMANITIES

intelligence by their own efforts and thus show themselves to be
worthy of their creators’ help, they will be helped.
For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken
away even that he hath. Matthew 13: 12

The people who will not be able to prove their intelligence will not
survive. Humans have almost proved that they are worthy of being
recognized by their creators as their equals. They lack only... a little
love. Love for each other, and particularly for their creators.
…it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven. Matthew 13: 11.

The three planets, on which life has been created, have been set in
competition against one another. The planet on which humanity
makes the most scientific progress, thereby proving its intelligence,
will receive the benefit of their creators’ inheritance on the day of the
“last judgement” - so long as they do not behave aggressively towards
their creators.
This will be the day when their knowledge will have reached a
sufficiently high level. At present human beings on Earth are not very
far away from that day. Human genius is:
Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is
the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds
of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Matthew 13: 32.

The “birds of the air” here refers to the creators who will come and
lodge in the branches; that is to say, will come to give their knowledge
to humanity when humanity shows itself worthy of it.
71

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took,
and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
Matthew 13: 33.

This is another allusion to the three worlds in which the creators
are waiting for science to bloom.
I will utter things which have been kept secret from the
foundation of the world. Matthew 13: 35.

Here we have something fundamentally important. Planets have a
life span, and one day they will no longer be habitable. By that time
humanity must have reached a level of scientific knowledge sufficient
either to undertake a move to another planet, or if it cannot adapt
itself elsewhere, to create a humanoid form of life capable of surviving
on another world. If the environment cannot be adapted to suit
people, then people must be created who are compatible with the
new environment.
Before humanity becomes extinct, you would, for example, have to
create another race of people capable of living in a totally different
atmosphere, who would inherit your knowledge before you
disappear. So that this inheritance would not be lost, the creators put
life on three worlds, and only the best one will be entitled to the
inheritance:
So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth,
and sever the wicked from among the just. Matthew 13: 49.’

72

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - S CIENTIFIC M IRACLES

Scientific Miracles
‘The passage concerning the multiplication of bread has already been
explained. It refers to concentrated food products in the form of large
pills, rather like those containing all the vital elements, which your
astronauts use. Your “Holy Bread” hosts are reminiscent of these pills.
With the equivalent of a few loaves of bread, there is enough to feed
thousands of people.
When Jesus walked on the water, the creators supported him using
an anti-gravity beam, which cancelled the effect of weight at a precise
point:
17

He came unto them, walking upon the sea. Matthew 14: 25.

The beam, in fact, created a turbulence, which is described as
follows:
But when he saw the wind boisterous, he (Peter) was afraid... And
when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
Matthew 14: 30-32.

The “wind ceased” as they boarded the boat, because the beam was
switched off when Jesus reached it. Another totally scientific
“miracle”.
In reality, there are no such things as miracles, only differences in
levels of civilization. If you had landed at the time of Jesus in a
spacecraft, or even a simple helicopter, even though your level of
scientific development may have been limited, you would, in the eyes
of the people of that time, have been performing miracles.
Just by producing artificial light, coming from the sky, driving a
car, watching television, or even by killing a bird with a gun, because
they would have been incapable of understanding the mechanism
behind such phenomena, people of the time would have seen in them
73

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

a divine or supernatural force. Also do not forget that the same
scientific gap which exists between you and the people at the time of
Jesus, also exists now between you and us. We can still do things,
which you would consider “miracles”.
But for the most advanced individuals among you, they would no
longer really be miracles since for the last few decades, you have taken
the path of science and are trying to grasp the reason behind things
instead of dumbly prostrating yourselves on your bellies and bringing
offerings.
Our knowledge, however, remains such that if we decided to
perform a few miracles, even your most eminent scientists would be
unable to understand how we did them. There are some particularly
well developed minds who would be able to cope with such things,
but people in general would simply panic, and we are still capable of
astonishing people, even though they are no longer so easily shocked.
It is necessary for people to understand that there is no ethereal
“God”, but only people who created other people in their image.
In Chapter 17 of St. Matthew’s Gospel, the creators appear once
again:
Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and
bringeth them up into a high mountain apart: and he was
transfigured before them; and his face did shine as the sun, and
his garments became white as the light... And behold, there
appeared unto them Moses and Elijah talking with him... behold,
a voice out of the cloud, saying, ‘This is my beloved Son... hear
17
ye him.’ Matthew 17: 1-5.

This scene happens at night, and the apostles are all frightened to
see Jesus illuminated by the powerful searchlights of the spacecraft,
out of which Moses and Elijah stepped, still alive thanks to the tree
of life from which they had benefited. Immortality is a scientific
reality, even if it does not correspond to humanity’s idea of
immortality.
74

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - S CIENTIFIC M IRACLES

In Chapter 19, Verse 30 of St. Matthew, there is a sentence:
But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.

This means that the created shall become creators just as the
creators were created.’

Deserving the Inheritance
‘In Chapter 25, Verses 14-29 of St. Matthew’s Gospel, it is said that the
three planets must make scientific progress, and they will be judged
one day. We read in the parable: Leaving for a trip, a man entrusted
three of his slaves with his goods.The first one received five talents;
the second, two talents; the third, one talent.
When the master returns, the first gave back to him the five talents
and shows him five others which he won. The second gave him back
the two talents plus two others that he won. The third gave him back
only one talent, the one that was given to him.
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which
hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and
he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be
taken away even that which he hath.

Out of the three worlds where life has been created, the one which
makes the most progress will receive the inheritance. The ones which
have not progressed will be dominated by the other and eliminated.
This is also true on Earth between peoples.
In St. Matthew’s Gospel, Chapter 26, Jesus reveals the importance of
his death and of the writings, which would later serve as proof. When
one of his companions tried to defend him with a sword, he said:
75

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than
twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? Matthew 26: 52-54.

It was in fact necessary for Jesus to die in order for the truth to be
known throughout the world so that later on, when your creators
return to Earth, they are not taken for usurpers or invaders. That is
the purpose of the biblical and evangelical writings: to preserve traces
of the work and presence of your creators, so that they will be
recognized when they return.
After his death, Jesus was resuscitated with the help of the creators:
And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of
Yahweh descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the
stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was like
lightning, and his raiment white as snow. Matthew 28: 2-3.

The creators took care of Jesus and revived him. And he said:
Go ye therefore, and teach all nations... Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
Matthew 28: 19-20.

Jesus’ mission was coming to an end:
16

So then after Jesus had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven. Mark 16: 19.

The creators took him away after this last most important phrase:

76

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - D ESERVING T HE I NHERITANCE

They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
18
shall recover. Mark 16: 18.

This refers to humanity discovering anti-venom serums and
antidotes, and developing surgery and so on - as is happening now.
In preparation for their arrival on Earth, the creators will appear
more and more frequently, in order to highlight these revelations.
This also is happening right now.
Behold the fig tree... When they now shoot forth, ye see and
know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand.
Luke 21: 29-30.

When unidentified flying objects begin appearing in large
numbers, as they are doing at present, it means that the time has
come. In the Acts of the Apostles, it says, furthermore, in Chapter 2:
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house
where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they
were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other
tongues... Acts 2: 1-4.

To make it possible for the apostles to spread the truth throughout
the world, the creators exposed them to a concentrated burst of
teaching sent to them by amplified telepathic waves, a little like
electro-shocks, which impregnated their memories with elements of
other languages.
In the Acts of the Apostles, note the numerous appearances made by
the creators - the “angels” - particularly when they liberated Peter,
who had been chained up by Herod:
77

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And, behold, the angel of Yahweh came upon him, and a light
shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised
him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his
hands. And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on
thy sandals. And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy
garment about thee, and follow me. And he went out, and
followed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by the
angel; but thought he saw a vision. Acts 12: 7- 9.

Peter, primitive as he was, thought he was having a vision as his
chains fell off. He did not know about the electric laser welding torch,
which was being used by one of the creators. When such fantastic
things happen, people think they are dreaming. This is why it was
often said that people who have seen the creators must have had a
vision or seen them in a dream. In the same way, it is said that people
who have seen our flying saucers must have had hallucinations. In
that quotation, it is clearly explained that Peter thought he had seen
everything in a dream, but in fact, it was all very real.
They came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which
opened to them of his own accord... and forthwith the angel
departed from him. Acts 12: 10.

Another sign that the time has come is that the people of Israel
have regained their country:
After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of
David, which is fallen down. Acts 15: 16.

Another important sentence is found in a following chapter:
For we are also his offspring. Acts 17: 28

78

T HE ROLE O F C HRIST - D ESERVING T HE I NHERITANCE

This was said by an apostle while speaking of “God”.
We shall not continue to read further in the Gospels where there
are many more references to the creators, because they are less
important. You can interpret them yourself for those who ask
questions in the light of the explanations I have already given you.’
And saying that, he left, just as on previous occasions.

79

5
THE END OF

THE

WORLD

1946, First Year of the New Era

T

he next day, he returned just as before and started to speak: ‘The
time of the end of the world has arrived. Not the end of the
world as in a catastrophe destroying the Earth, but the end of the
world of the Church, which has completed its work. It performed
this role more or less effectively. It was a task of vulgarization, making
it possible for your creators to be recognized when they return. As
you have noticed, the Christian church is dying. It is the end of this
world because its mission has been fulfilled, albeit with quite a few
mistakes because it tried for so long to deify the creators.
This deification was acceptable until the scientific age began. Then
it should have been removed completely. This would have been
possible had the truth been preserved, or if people had been able to
read between the lines. But too many mistakes were made.
This was foreseen by the creators, and the Church will collapse
because it is no longer of any use. In scientifically developed
countries, people are already consumed by a kind of moroseness
because they have nothing left to believe in. Nobody can believe in a
“Heavenly God” any longer, perched upon a cloud with a white
beard, omniscient and omnipotent, which is what the Church wants
us to do. Neither can anybody believe in delightful little guardian
angels, nor in a devil with horns and hooves. So nobody knows what

80

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - 1946, F IRST Y EAR O F T HE N EW E RA

to believe in any more. Only a few young people have understood
that love is essential. You have reached the golden age.
People of the Earth, you fly in the heavens, and your voices are
carried to the four corners of the Earth by means of radio waves. So
the time has come for you to know the truth.
As it has been foretold, everything is happening now that the Earth
has entered the Age of Aquarius. Certain people have already written
about this, but no one believed them. Some 22,000 years ago, your
creators decided to start their work on Earth, and everything that has
happened since was anticipated because the movement of the galaxy
implies this knowledge.
The Age of Pisces was the age of Christ and his fishermen, and the
Age of Aquarius, which follows, began in 1946. This is the era in
which the people of Israel found their country again:
And it shall come to pass in that day... that there shall be the noise
19
of a cry from the pisces gate... Zephaniah 1: 10.

The Gate of Pisces is the passageway into the Age of Aquarius. This
is the moment when the Sun rises over the Earth on the day of the
vernal equinox in the constellation of Aquarius. The loud clamor is
the sound accompanying this revelation.
It is not by chance that you were born in 1946.’

The End of the Church
‘This revelation, thanks to the enlightenment it contains, will bring
back hope and happiness to people who are morose. But it will also
hasten the fall of the Church - unless the Church can understand its
mistakes and place itself at the service of the truth.

81

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: That make
a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that
reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of
nought. Isaiah 29: 20-21.

It is the end of those people who want to make us believe in
original sin and who want to make us feel guilty; the end for people
who lay traps for those who spread the truth at the end of the Age of
Pisces and the beginning of the Age of Aquarius; the end of people
who are trying to save the Church as it existed, while ousting the just
- those who speak of justice and those who write or preach the truth.
They are like the people who crucified Jesus. Such people were
convinced that they were defending what was right without trying to
understand and were frightened of being ruined and destroyed at the
dawning of the Age of Pisces.
And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of
them that hear shall hearken... The vile person shall be no more
called liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful... For the vile
person will speak villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to
practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against Yahweh, to make
empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the
thirsty to fail. The instruments also of the churl are evil: he
deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words,
even when the needy speaketh right. But the liberal deviseth
liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand.
Isaiah 32: 3-8.

Everyone in this case will understand the words: “the eyes of them
that see shall not be dim”. It is the Church who speaks of Yahweh
deceitfully and leaves empty the souls of those who are hungry for the
truth.

82

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - T HE E ND O F T HE C HURCH

It is the Church, which devises infamous plans to annihilate the
poor, so that those who are unable to understand or who dare not
understand, will remain faithful to it through the fear of sin,
excommunication or other such nonsensical things. While the poor
try to plead their case, those who lack the intelligence to seize the
truth stand up for the lies of the Church at the Church’s bidding. But
those of noble mind, those who loudly proclaim the truth, they
perform noble acts, even though they may live without the approval
of the agonizing Church of Man.
Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the
foundations of the earth? Isaiah 40: 21.
Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect [in whom] my
soul delighteth! I will put my Spirit upon him; he shall bring forth
20
judgment to the nations. Isaiah 42: 1.

You are the one who will spread the truth throughout the world,
this truth which has been revealed to you over the past few days.
A bruised reed will he not break, and a dimly burning wick will
17
he not quench. Isaiah 42: 3.

You will not be able to destroy the Church and its lies completely,
but eventually, it will fade out by itself. This extinction has been
going on for some time. The “wick” is weakening. It has
accomplished its mission, and it is time for it to disappear. It has
made mistakes and has enriched itself at the expense of the truth,
without trying to interpret it in a clear enough way for people of this
era. But do not be too hard on it, for thanks to the Church, the word
of the Bible, which is a witness to the truth, has spread throughout
the world.

83

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Its mistakes have been great, particularly when it injected too
much of the supernatural into the truth, and wrongly translated the
scriptures in ordinary Bibles. It replaced the term “Elohim”, which
refers to the creators, with a singular term “God”, whereas in fact
Elohim in Hebrew is the plural of Eloha.
In this way, the Church transformed the creators into a single
incomprehensible God. Another mistake was to make people adore a
wooden cross in memory of Jesus Christ. A cross is not the Christ. A
piece of wood in the shape of a cross means nothing:
And none taketh it to heart, neither is there knowledge nor
understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire, and have
also baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have roasted flesh, and
eaten, and with the rest thereof shall I make an abomination? shall
21
I bow down to a block of wood? Isaiah 44: 19.’

The Creation of the State of Israel
‘The return of the Jewish people to Israel, as it was predicted, is a sign
of the golden age:
I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;
I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back:
bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the
earth; Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created
him for my glory. Isaiah 43: 5-7.

This is indeed the creation of the state of Israel welcoming Jews
from the north and from the south. The Bible, preserved by the

84

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - T HE C REATION O F T HE S TATE O F I SRAEL

Jewish people, bears witness to the coming of the creators as it is
written:
Ye are my witnesses. Isaiah 43: 10.
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have
ears. Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people
be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us
former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may
be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth. Ye are my
witnesses, saith Yahweh, and my servant whom I have chosen:
that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he...
therefore ye are my witnesses, saith Yahweh, that I am El. Yea,
before the day was I am he. Isaiah 43: 8-13.

“Ye are my witnesses.” That is quite explicit, isn’t it? And I can tell
22
you again on this day - from ancient days I am one and the same thanks to the witness that you hold in your hand, the Bible.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will I gather thee. Isaiah 54: 7.

The people of Israel have, in fact, regained their country after
having participated in safeguarding the truth.
The time when humanity will overcome illness by scientific means is
predicted:
There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man
that hath not filled his days. Isaiah 65: 20.

Medicine now helps people triumph over illness and especially over
infant mortality.

85

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but
a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.
Proverbs 10: 13.’

The Mistakes of the Church
‘The Church was sinful in making human beings feel guilty and
making them pray without seeking to understand:
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
Matthew 6: 7.

And despite the warning in the Gospels, the Church has also made
itself too wealthy, while it was written:
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth... No man can
serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve Yahweh and mammon. Matthew 6: 19-24.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, Nor
scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves. Matthew 10: 9-10.

But with their stupid rules and meatless Fridays, they didn’t respect
their own Gospels:

86

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - T HE M ISTAKES O F T HE C HURCH

Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that
which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.
Matthew 15: 11.

How dare they, these men who are only men, indulge themselves
in the wealth and luxury of the Vatican when the Gospels tell them to
possess “neither gold, nor silver” - not even a spare coat?
How dare they preach goodness?
And Jesus said unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, It is hard
17
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew 19: 23.
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
them on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them
with one of their fingers. But all their works they do for to be seen
of men... and love the uppermost rooms at feasts... and greetings
in the markets... for one is your Master, even Christ; and all you
are brothers. And call no man your father on the earth: for one is
your Father, which is in heaven. Neither be you called masters: for
one is your Master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you
17
shall be your servant. Matthew 23: 4-11.

That is all written in their own Gospels. So how dare the Church
burden people with their so called sins, which are only different
concepts of morality and lifestyles; how dare they speak of goodness
while living in opulence in the Vatican when people are dying of
hunger; how dare they seek invitations and honors while preaching
humility; how dare they ask people to call them “Father”, “Your
Eminence”, or “Your Holiness”, when their Gospels expressly forbid
all these things?
If tomorrow the Pope took to the road as a pauper, the Church
would be revived, but it would have a totally different humanitarian

87

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

goal to that which it has pursued up to now - namely the propagation
of what must serve as proof for today.
That mission is finished, but the Church can re-orientate itself
towards goodness by helping those who are unhappy, by helping to
spread the real truth of those writings, which until now, have been
distorted or kept secret. In this way, the generous spirit of many
priests would find fulfillment. For that to happen, the men of the
Vatican should set an example by selling all their treasures to help
finance underdeveloped countries. They should go to those countries
and help people progress by offering practical help with their bare
hands not just with “the good word”.
It is unacceptable too that there are different categories of marriage
and more particularly of burials, according to a person’s wealth. This
is another mistake of the Church.
But the time has come.’

At the Root of All Religions
‘It is not only in the Bible and the Gospels that there are traces of the
truth; testimonies can be found in practically every religion. The
Kabala especially is one of the richest in testimonies, but it would not
have been easy for you to get hold of one.
If one day you can find a copy, then you will be able to see that
there are a great number of allusions to us. Particularly noteworthy is
a description in the Canticle of Canticles (5) of the creators’ planet and
the distance which separates it from Earth.
It is written that the “height of the creator” is 236,000 “parasangs”,
and that “the height of his heels” is 30,000,000 “parasangs”. The
parasang is a unit of measurement just like the parsec, which stands
for the distance that light can travel in one second, which is about
300,000 kilometers. Our planet is 30,000,000 parasangs away from

88

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - AT T HE ROOT O F A LL R ELIGIONS

Earth or about nine thousand billion kilometers, just a little less than
a light year.
By moving at the speed of light, or 300,000 kilometers per second,
you would take almost one year to reach our planet. With your
present day rockets, which travel at only 40,000 kilometers per hour,
it would take you about 26,000 years to reach our planet.
So you can see that we have nothing to fear for the time being. We
have the means to travel to Earth from our planet in less than two
months with an atom-based propulsion method, which enables us to
move at the speed of rays that are seven times faster than the speed of
light.
Those rays “carry” us. To be carried by them, we leave the optical
window, which is the spectrum of rays detected by the eye, to tune
into the carrying beam. That is why people on Earth who have
observed our spaceships have described them as becoming luminous,
then very brilliant white, then blue, and finally disappearing.
Obviously when a spacecraft goes beyond the speed of light, it
disappears and is no longer visible to the naked eye. That is the
“height of the creator’s heels”, the distance at which his heels, so to
speak, rest on a planet.
The creators’ own planet is 236,000 parasangs from its sun - a very
big star - or seventy billion, eight hundred million kilometers. This is
what is meant by the “height” of the creators.
The Kabala is the closest book to the truth, but almost all religious
books allude to us with varying degrees of clarity. This is especially
true in those countries where the creators had bases - in the Andes, in
the Himalayas, in Greece where Greek mythology also contains
important testimonies, as well as in the Buddhist and Islamic
religions and among the Mormons. It would take many pages to
name all the religions and sects that testify in a more or less obscure
way to our work.’

89

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Mankind: A Disease of the Universe
‘There, now you know the truth. You must write it down and make
it known throughout the world. If people on Earth want us to give
them the benefit of our experience and help them gain 25,000 years
of scientific knowledge, they have to show us that they want to meet
us, and above all demonstrate that they deserve it, and that all this can
be done without any danger to us.
If we give our knowledge to humanity, we have to be sure they will
make good use of it. Our observations in recent years have not shown
that wisdom rules the Earth. Certainly there has been progress, but
some people still die of hunger, and a warlike spirit still exists
throughout the world. We know that our arrival could improve many
things and unite nations, but we have to feel that people really want
to see us, and that they are truly starting to unify.
We also have to feel that they really want to see us arrive, knowing
fully who we are and understanding the true meaning of our arrival.
Several times human warplanes have tried to chase our crafts,
taking us for enemies.
You must tell them who we are, so that we can show ourselves
without any risk of either getting hurt or killed - which is not the case
at present - or of creating a dangerous and murderous panic.
Some researchers want to contact us by radio, but we do not
respond because in this way they could locate our planet. On the
other hand, transmission times would be too long, and our
broadcasting system uses waves that your technology cannot pick up
because you have not yet discovered them. They are seven times faster
than radio waves, and we are experimenting with new waves that are
one and a half times faster than that.
Progress continues, and our own research continues for the
purpose of understanding and relating to the large being of whom we
are a part, and on whose atoms we are parasites. These atoms are the
planets and the stars.
90

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - M ANKIND : A D ISEASE O F T HE U NIVERSE

In fact, we have been able to discover that intelligent living beings
in the infinitely small live on particles that are planets and suns to
them. They ask the same questions as ourselves.
Humanity is a disease inside this gigantic being, and the planets
and stars are its atoms. Also this same gigantic being is in its turn a
parasite on other greater atoms. In both directions, it is infinite. But
the important thing is to make sure that the disease, which is
humanity, continues to exist and never dies.
We did not know when we were creating you that we were
accomplishing a secondary mission “written” into us, thus repeating
what had been done for us.
From what we created and how it has developed, we have
discovered our own origins. For we were also created by other people
who have since disappeared. Their world has quite certainly
disintegrated, but thanks to them, we were able to continue in their
steps and create you.
We may disappear one day, but by then you will have replaced us
and taken over our roles. So you are the link in the precious chain of
human continuity. Other worlds exist, and humanity is certainly
developing in other parts of the universe.
But in this region of the universe, our world is the only one to have
made new creations. This is important because, from each world,
innumerable children can be brought forth who are precious for
preserving continuity. This allows us to hope that one day humanity
will no longer be in danger of disappearing completely.
But we are not sure that humankind can ever stabilize itself in
abundance. The chain has always continued, but we must not upset
the equilibrium of the immense body in which we are a parasite
because, by developing too much, we could trigger a catastrophe,
which at best might bring about a recession and at worst cause
complete destruction.
In a healthy body, a few germs can live without danger, but if they
develop too much, they cause a disease, which troubles the organism.
Then the organism reacts to destroy the germs responsible, either
naturally or with the help of medication. The important thing,
91

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

apparently, is to create enough worlds so that humanity does not
extinguish itself, but above all else, to make sure that the equilibrium
is not broken by concentrating our efforts anew on seeking to make
those who exist happier.
It is in this area that we can help you tremendously.’

Evolution: A Myth
‘I make a parenthesis here, because you must dispel from your minds
all uncertainty about evolution. Your scientists who have elaborated
theories of evolution are not completely wrong in saying that
humanity is descended from the monkey, and the monkey from the
fish, and so on. In reality, the first living organism created on Earth
was unicellular, which then gave rise to more complex life forms.
But this did not happen by chance! When we came to Earth to
create life, we started by making very simple creations and then
improved our techniques of environmental adaptation. This enabled
us to make in turn fish, amphibians, mammals, birds, primates and
finally man himself, who is just an improved model of the monkey to
which we added what makes us essentially human.
In this way, we made human beings in our image, as it is written
in the Bible in Genesis. You could have realized for yourselves that
there is little chance of a series of accidents producing such a large
variety of life forms - the colors of birds and their elaborate mating
rituals, or the shape of certain antelope horns.
What natural need could lead antelopes or wild goats to develop
curled horns? Or birds to have blue or red feathers? And what about
exotic fish?
All that is the work of our artists. Do not forget the artists when
you yourselves create life. Imagine a world without them - no music,
films, paintings or sculptures... Life would be very boring, and

92

T HE E ND

OF

T HE W ORLD - E VOLUTION : A M YTH

animals very ugly if their bodies corresponded only to their needs and
functions.
Evolution of the various forms of life on Earth is really the
evolution of techniques of creation and the increased sophistication
of the creators’ work. This eventually led them to create people
similar to themselves. You can find the skulls of prehistoric men who
were the first human prototypes.
These were replaced each time by others more evolved. This
continued right up to your present form, which is the exact replica of
your creators who were afraid to create anything highly superior to
themselves, although some were tempted to do so.
If we could be sure that human beings would never turn against
their creators to dominate or destroy them - as has happened between
the different human races created successively on Earth - but instead
would love them as parents, the temptation would be great to create
an improved humankind.
This is possible but at what enormous risk! In fact, some creators
worry that the people of the Earth may be slightly superior to their
fathers. “Satan” is one of those who has always thought, and still does,
that the people of the Earth are a danger to our planet because they
are a little too intelligent. But the majority among us thinks that you
will prove to us that you love us, and that you will never try to destroy
us. That is the least we expect before coming to help you.
It is even possible that at each creation of humankind by
humankind, a small improvement is achieved, a true evolution of the
human race, which is gradual, so that the creators do not feel
threatened when faced with their creations.
This makes it possible to speed up progress. Although we do not
think that at present we can give you our scientific heritage, we do
feel it is safe to give you our political and humanitarian knowledge.
This will not threaten your planet, but will allow you to be happier
on Earth. Thanks to this happiness, you will progress faster, and that
could also help you to show us more speedily that you deserve our
help and our inheritance in striving to achieve an intergalactic level
of civilization.
93

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Otherwise, if humanity cannot calm its aggressiveness, if peace
does not become your only goal, and you allow people to promote
war, produce arms, test nuclear weapons, and maintain armies just to
seize or retain power, then we will stop such people from becoming a
danger to us, and there would be another Sodom and Gomorrah.
How could we not fear people from Earth when they attack their
own, we who are from another world and slightly different?
You, Claude Vorilhon, you will spread the truth under your
present name, which you will replace progressively with RAEL, which
means literally “light of God” and if we translate it more accurately,
“light of the Elohim” or “Ambassador of the Elohim”, because you
will be our ambassador on Earth, and we will come only officially to
your Embassy. RAEL can be simply translated as “messenger”.
And it is through telepathy that we made you name your son
Ramuel, which means “the son of the one who brings light”, because
he is truly the son of our messenger, of our ambassador.’
And following that pronouncement, he left, just as he had done on
other mornings.

94

6
THE NEW COMMANDMENTS

Geniocracy

I

met him the next day, and again he began to speak:
‘First of all, let us look at the political and economic aspects of life.
What kind of people allows humanity to progress? The geniuses.
Therefore, your world must revalorize its geniuses and allow them to
govern the Earth.
Power was in the hands of brutes, who were superior to others
because of their muscular strength. Next in power were the rich, who
used their money to employ many “brutes” in their service. Then
came the politicians who ensnared the people of democratic countries
with their own hopes - not to mention military men whose success
has been based around the rational organization of brutality.
The only type of people you have never placed in power are the
ones who help humanity to progress. Whether they discovered the
wheel, gunpowder, the internal combustion engine or the atom, the
geniuses have always allowed less intelligent people in power to
benefit from their inventions. Often such people have used peaceful
inventions for murderous ends. All that must be changed.
For this to happen, you must abolish all your electoral and polling
systems because in their present form, they are completely unsuited
to human development. Each person is a useful cell in this huge body
we call humanity. The cell in your foot should not decide whether or
not your hand should pick up a given object. It is the brain, which
95

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

must decide, and if the object in question is good, the cell of your
foot will benefit from it. It is not up to the foot to vote. Its job is
simply to transport the body - including the brain - and it is not
capable of judging if what the hand takes is good or not.
Votes only have a positive effect when there is an equivalence of
knowledge and intellect. Copernicus was condemned by a majority of
incompetent people because he was the only one at that time who
had a sufficiently high level of comprehension. Although the Church
- that is to say the majority - believed the Earth was the center of the
universe, this turned out to be wrong. The Earth really revolved
around the sun, and Copernicus - the minority - turned out to be
right.
When the first cars were invented, if we had asked everyone to vote
to establish whether cars should be allowed to exist or not, the
majority, who knew nothing about cars and did not care, would have
responded negatively, and you would still be riding in a horse and
cart. So, how can you change all that?
These days, you have psychologists who are capable of creating
tests to evaluate the intelligence and adaptation of every individual.
These tests should be applied systematically from infancy onward in
order to define each individual’s orientation towards subjects studied.
When individuals reach a responsible age, their intellectual
coefficient can be measured and included on their identity or voter’s
card. Only those with an intellectual capacity of at least fifty per cent
above the average should be eligible for a public post. To vote,
individuals would need an intellectual coefficient of at least ten per
cent above average. If such a system existed now, many of your
present politicians would not hold the positions they do today.
This is a totally democratic system. There are many engineers, for
example, who are of lower than average intelligence, but who have
very good memories and have obtained several academic degrees
because of this.
On the other hand, there are many laborers or farm workers who
have no specialized education at all, but whose intelligence is fifty per
cent above the average. What is totally unacceptable now is that the
96

T HE N EW C OMMANDMENTS - G ENIOCRACY

voice of someone whom you might vulgarly call “a cretin” is worth as
much as that of a genius, who has thought maturely about the way
he or she is going to vote. In some small cities, elections are won by
the candidate who buys people the most drinks - not by the
individual whose policies are the most interesting.
Therefore, right from the start, the right to vote should be reserved
for those people whose brains are more suited to thinking and finding
solutions to problems - that is to say, an elite group of high
intelligence. This does not necessarily mean those people who have
done the most studying.
We are talking about placing the genius in power, and you may call
that “Geniocracy”.’

Humanitarianism
‘Second point: Your world is paralyzed by profit, and Communism
fails to provide a carrot big enough to motivate people and encourage
them to make progress.
You are all born equal; this is also written in the Bible. Your
governments should ensure that people are born with approximately
the same level of financial means. It is unacceptable that children of
low intelligence should live in luxury thanks to the fortunes amassed
by their fathers, while geniuses die of hunger and do any menial
chore just to eat.
This way they forsake occupations where they could have made
discoveries benefiting the whole of humanity. To avoid this, property
ownership must be abolished without establishing Communism.
This world is not yours - that also is written in the Bible. You are
only tenants. Thus all goods should be rented for forty-nine years.
This will eliminate the injustice of inheritance. Your true inheritance,
and that of your children, is the entire world, if you knew how to
organize yourselves to make it pleasant. This political orientation of
97

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

humanity is not Communism; its preoccupation is the future of
humanity. If you want to give it a name, call it “Humanitarianism”.
Take for example a man who has finished his studies at the age of
twenty-one and wants to work. He chooses his profession and earns
a salary. If he wants to find a place to live while his parents are still
alive, he “buys” a house - but of course, in reality, he is renting a
house or apartment for forty-nine years from the State which
constructed it.
If the value of the house is estimated at 100,000 francs, he can pay
that amount divided into monthly installments for forty-nine years.
At the age of seventy (twenty-one plus forty-nine), he will have paid
for his house and can live there until his death, without ever paying
again.
After his death, the house will go back to the State, which must
then allow his children, if there are any, to benefit from it freely.
Supposing there is one child, then this child can live freely all his life
in his father’s house. At his death, his child in turn can also benefit
from the family house, and so on indefinitely. Inheritance must be
completely abolished, except for the family house. This does not,
however, prevent each person from being rewarded individually for
their merits.
Let us take another example. Someone has two children. One is a
good worker, and the other is lazy. At the age of twenty-one, they
both decide to go their own separate ways. They each rent a house
worth 100,000 francs.
The worker will rapidly earn more money than the lazy one. He
will then be able to rent a house worth twice as much as the first one.
If he has the means, he will even be able to rent both houses, one as
a country house.
If his savings are fruitful, he will also be able to build a house and
rent it for forty-nine years, thereby receiving money due to him. But
at his death, everything will go back to the community, except for the
family home, which will go to the children.

98

T HE N EW C OMMANDMENTS - H UMANITARIANISM

Thus individuals can make a fortune for themselves depending on
their own merits, but not for their children. To each their own merits.
The same should apply to commercial and industrial enterprises.
If someone creates a business, it is theirs for their entire life, and
they can rent it out, but never for more than forty-nine years. The
same goes for farmers. They can rent land and cultivate it for fortynine years, but after that, it all goes back to the State, which will be
able to rent it out again for another forty-nine years. Their children
can also rent it for forty-nine years.
This method must be adopted for all goods that remain
exploitable, and as for the value of things, nothing changes.
Everything that is of value such as shares, gold, enterprises, cash, or
buildings is owned by the community but may be rented for fortynine years by those who have acquired the means by their own merits
and labor.
In this way, somebody who made a fortune around the age of forty
will be able to construct houses, rent them as apartments for fortynine years, and enjoy that money so long as life lasts.
Afterwards, the money, which comes from these rents, will go back
to the community. This humanitarianism is already prescribed in the
Bible:
And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven
times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years
shall be unto thee forty and nine years. Leviticus 25: 8.
And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy
neighbour’s hand, ye shall not oppress one another: According to
the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy
neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits
he shall sell unto thee: According to the multitude of years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the
number of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.
Leviticus 25: 14-16.
99

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine; for ye are
strangers and sojourners with me. Leviticus 25: 23.

If geniuses are admitted to power, they will understand the
usefulness of these reforms. You must also see to it that all the nations
of the Earth unite to form only one government.’

World Government
‘The creation of a new worldwide currency and a common language
would help you to establish a world government. The Auvergne
dialect is no longer spoken in Clermont-Ferrand, and very soon,
French will no longer be spoken in Paris, nor English in London, nor
German in Frankfurt. Your scientists and linguists should unite and
create a new language, inspired by all languages and made obligatory
in all the schools of the world, as a second language.
The same must be done with money. Worldwide currency values
cannot be based on the franc, the dollar, or the yen, but must be
based on a new currency created for the needs of the whole Earth,
without depriving one group of people who would ask themselves
why another currency has been chosen instead of their own.
Finally, the trigger required to bring about such a union is the
suppression of military conscription, which teaches only
aggressiveness to young men. Professional armies must then be put at
the service of the public.
This must happen at the same time in all countries so as to provide
an indispensable guarantee of security.’

100

T HE N EW C OMMANDMENTS - Y OUR M ISSION

Your Mission
‘As I have already told you, we know that our official arrival would
accelerate many things. But we will wait until we see that human
beings really want us to come, that they love us and respect us like the
parents that we truly are, and that our spacecrafts will not be
threatened by your destructive military forces.
To achieve this, make it known throughout the world that you
have met me, and repeat what I have said to you. Wise people will
listen to you. Many will take you for a madman or a visionary, but I
have already explained to you what to think of the imbecilic majority.
You know the truth, and we will stay in contact with you by
telepathy to give you confidence and additional information if we
think it is necessary.
What we want is to see if there are enough wise people on Earth.
If a sufficiently large number of people follow you, then we will come
openly.
Where? At the place you will have prepared for our arrival.
Have a residence built in a pleasant country with a mild climate,
with seven rooms always ready to receive guests, each with a separate
bathroom, a conference room able to accommodate twenty-one
people, a swimming pool and a dining room capable of seating
twenty-one people.
This residence should be constructed in the middle of a park and
should be protected from curious onlookers. The park should be
entirely surrounded by walls to prevent anyone from seeing the
residence and the swimming pool.
The residence should be situated at a distance of at least one
thousand meters from the walls around the park. It will have a
maximum of two stories and should be further screened from view by
an inner barrier of trees and bushes. Install two entrances in the
surrounding wall, one to the south and another on the northern side.
The residence will also have two entrances.
101

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

There will be a terrace on the roof where a spacecraft of twelve
meters in diameter may land. Access from that terrace to the interior
is essential.
The air space above and around the residence should not be under
direct military or radar surveillance.
You will try to ensure that the area where this residence is built - if
possible larger than stipulated here - is treated as neutral territory by
other nations and by the nation on whose territory it is located, by
virtue of it being our embassy on Earth.
You may live with your wife and children in the residence, which
will be under your direction, and you will be able to have servants
there and invite guests of your choosing. However, the area
containing the seven rooms should be directly under the terrace, and
it should be separated from the section used by human beings by a
thick metal door, lockable from the inside, which is kept permanently
closed. An aseptic chamber should be built at the entrance to the
conference room.
The financing of the project will be made possible through the
help you will receive from those people who will believe in you, and
therefore in us. They will be wise and intelligent, and they will be
rewarded when we come.
Keep a record, therefore, of those who contribute financially to the
construction and upkeep of the residence, however modest their
contribution.
Also, in each nation throughout the world, appoint an individual
who will be responsible for communicating the truth, and who will
help others join together to spread it.
Once a year, on a mountain near the residence, gather together
from all over the world all those people who have heard about us
through these writings and want us to come. Assemble the largest
number of people possible, and have them think intensely about us
and hope for our coming.
When there are enough people, and when they wish intensely
enough for us to come without any religious mysticism, but as
responsible people respecting their creators, then we will land openly
102

T HE N EW C OMMANDMENTS - Y OUR M ISSION

and give you our scientific knowledge as our heritage to all peoples of
the Earth.
If those with warlike temperaments are rendered harmless all over
the whole world, then this will happen. If the love of life and
humanity’s love for us and itself are strong enough, yes, we will come
openly.
We will wait, and if human beings remain aggressive and continue
to progress in a manner which is dangerous for other worlds, then we
will destroy this civilization and its repositories of scientific wealth,
and there will be another Sodom and Gomorrah, until such time as
humanity becomes morally worthy of its level of scientific
understanding.
The future of humanity is in its own hands, and the truth is in
yours.
Communicate it throughout the world and do not be discouraged.
We will never help you openly, or in any way that would give proof
to the skeptics, since skepticism often goes hand in hand with
aggressiveness. Intelligent people will believe you since what you will
say contains nothing mystical.
It is important to us that they believe you without any material
proof. This proves to us more than anything else that they are
intelligent and so are worthy to receive our scientific knowledge.
Now go. You will not be forgotten if you succeed during your life
on Earth - or even after. If necessary, we can wait until the time of
your descendants to make our landing, because we can make you live
again scientifically, just as we can resurrect all those who have led
humanity along the path of human genius guided by the love of their
creators - so long as their remains are preserved in coffins or tombs.
The only help we will give you will be to appear in the skies more
and more frequently from now on in order to make people aware of
the problems, and make them want to learn more about the truth
that you are transmitting.
Gradually, thanks to these increased sightings, public awareness
will also increase, and our presence will no longer trigger stupid
103

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

adoration, but instead a deep desire within the population to make
contact with us.
23
You will call your movement Madech - the “movement for
welcoming the Elohim, creators of humanity”, which carries in its
initials a message, Moise a devancé Elie et le Christ, which means:
Moses preceded Elijah and the Christ.

In French this is:
M: mouvement pour (movement for)
A: l‘accueil (the welcoming)
D: des (of the)
E: Elohim
C: créateurs de (creators of)
H: l’humanité (humanity).’

104

7
THE ELOHIM

Nuclear Weapons

‘B

efore we leave each other for the last time,’ he said, ‘do you have
any questions to ask me?’
‘You have interpreted the vision of Ezekiel as people equipped with
space suits,’ I replied, ‘and you told me that the atmosphere of your
planet was not the same as that on Earth. So why aren’t you wearing
a pressurized suit now?’
‘Because we too have progressed scientifically, and now we can do
without them. My face seems to be in the open air, but really it is
protected by an invisible shield composed of repellent rays inside
which I breathe different air from you. These rays let waves pass
through, but not air molecules. It's a bit like the way you prevent fuel
deposits escaping from certain ports in your technology by using
emissions of bubbles.’
‘Are nuclear weapons a danger for humanity?’
‘Yes, a great danger. But if humanity does not become wise and
peaceful, the existence of your nuclear weapons will mean that if the
need arises, we will not have much to do in bringing about the
destruction of your civilization. Perhaps you might even destroy
yourselves.’
‘If you do not, however, and if you become a threat to us, we will
only have to destroy your stocks of bombs without sending offensive
weapons against you. We could do this with either rays, or telepathy,
105

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

in such a way that, in effect, one of the great powers would become
the aggressor, and this would automatically release a fatal retaliation.’
‘If people do not want to be exposed to that danger any longer, all
they have to do is take nuclear weapons away from the military. Such
nuclear power used with care could enable countries that lack energy
to make great strides forward. You urgently need to stop nuclear
weapons testing because you know nothing of the risks to which you
are exposing yourselves. However, if humanity continues to play with
nuclear weapons, it will simplify our task if we have to reduce you to
silence.’
‘Do you have any women on your planet?’
‘Yes, it is mentioned in the Bible, and I made you note the
appropriate quotation.’
‘And children also?’
‘Yes, we can have children exactly like you.’

Overpopulation
‘You told me you were immortal in some way. How do you prevent
over population?’
‘This problem will, in fact, be making itself evident very rapidly on
Earth. To resolve it - and you should resolve it immediately because
you are already sufficiently numerous - you must develop
contraception and pass strict laws authorizing women to have no
more than two children.
If a couple has only two children, the population will arrive at a
point where it no longer increases. We will be watching how well you
deal with this too. It will be another test of your intelligence, which
will help us see if you have earned our heritage. This solution I offer
is for humanity now where people only live for seventy-five years on
average. For us, the problem is very different. We are not eternal, but
we are able to live ten times longer than you, thanks to a small
106

T HE E LOHIM - OVERPOPULATION

surgical adjustment, which in effect is the biblical “tree of life”. We
have children, and we observe the rules, which I have just explained:
two parents, two children. This keeps our population constant.’
‘How many of you are there?’
‘We are a population of about seven billion.’
‘We have met on six consecutive days, but did you always go back
each time to your own planet?’
‘No, I returned to an intergalactic ship, which we use as a base and
which stays constantly close to the Earth.’
‘How many of you are on that vessel?’
‘Seven, and on our planet there are seven provinces. Each has a
representative on that vessel. If we add the two who are responsible
for the vessel, there are permanently nine of us.’
‘If the people here on Earth do exactly as you wish, what will
happen?’
‘We will come officially and land at the residence, which you will
have prepared. We will ask you to invite there the official
representatives of the most important countries of humanity, in order
to bring about total unification of the people on the Earth. If all goes
well, we will allow humanity to benefit step by step from our
scientific advances. Depending on the uses that will be made of it, we
will see if we can give humanity all our knowledge and allow you to
enter the intergalactic era with our 25,000 years of scientific progress
as your inheritance.’
‘Are you the only world to have attained such an advanced level in
science?’
‘In this region of the universe, yes. There is an infinite number of
worlds inhabited by beings of the humanoid type whose scientific
level is lower than ours, although much superior to yours. What
makes us fearful of disappearing is the fact that we have not yet found
any planet with a civilization as highly evolved as our own. We have
economic relations with many other planets on which life has been
created by other people who must have reached a scientific level
equivalent to ours, because their religious writings prove this to us.
107

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

‘Unfortunately, we have been unable to find the civilizations who
created the closest of these worlds. But perhaps we will find them
farther on as we continue to search the universe, each time moving
further away. In most cases, their planets approached the sun too
closely, and life became impossible, or their sun exploded, or became
too cold. Although we have not noticed anything abnormal at present
in our system, all this makes us fear the worst.’
‘So there is no religion where you live?’
‘Our only religion is human genius. We believe only in that, and
we particularly love the memory of our own creators whom we never
saw again and whose world we have never been able to find. They
must have disappeared. However, they had taken the precaution of
putting a huge space station in orbit around our planet, containing
all their knowledge, and this landed automatically when their world
was destroyed. Thanks to them, we have taken on the torch, and we
would like to see this torch taken up by the people of the Earth.’
‘And what would happen if your planet was destroyed?’
‘In case our world is destroyed, the same arrangements have been
made in advance, so that you would automatically inherit all our
knowledge.’

The Secret of Eternity
‘Do you really live ten times longer than we do?’ I asked.
‘Our body lives on average, ten times longer than yours,’ he
replied.
‘Like the first people of the Bible, that is between 750 and 1,200
years. But our mind, our true self, can be truly immortal. I have
already explained to you that, starting with any cell of the body, we
can re-create the whole person with new living matter. When we are
in full possession of our faculties and our brain is at its maximum
level of efficiency and knowledge, we surgically remove a tiny sample
108

T HE E LOHIM - T HE S ECRET O F E TERNITY

of the body, which we then preserve. Then, when we really die, we
take a cell from this preserved sample and re-create the body in full,
just as it had been at the time the sample was taken.
I say, “as it had been at that time”, meaning with all its scientific
knowledge and, of course, its personality. But in this case, the body is
made up of new elements with the potential for another one
thousand years of life - and so on eternally. But in order to limit the
growth of the population, only geniuses have the right to eternity.
Everybody on our planet has a cell sample taken at a certain age,
hoping that they will be chosen for re-creation after their death. In
fact they not only hope for it, they try to earn this resurrection during
their life. Once they have died, a grand council of the eternals
assembles to decide in a “last judgement”, who among those who
died during the year deserves to live another life. For a period of three
lifetimes, the eternal is on probation, and at the end of this time, the
council of the eternals reconvenes to judge who, in the light of their
work, deserves to join the council of the eternals as a perpetual
member.
From the moment that one wishes to have a new life, one no longer
has the right to have children, although this does not of course
prevent love. This explains why the scientists who were members of
the council of the eternals wished to create life on other planets. They
transferred their procreative instincts onto other planets.’
‘What do you call yourselves?’
‘If you wish to give us a name, even though we call ourselves men
and women in our language, you may call us Elohim, since we did
indeed come from the sky.’
‘What language do you speak on your planet?’
‘Our official language closely resembles ancient Hebrew.’
‘Each day we have talked here, weren’t you afraid other people
might have surprised us?’
‘An automatic system would have warned me immediately if
people had approached within a dangerous radius, by air or by land.’
‘What is your lifestyle and your work where you live?’
109

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

‘Most of our work is intellectual, as our level of scientific
development allows us to use robots for everything. We work only
when we feel the inclination - and then only with our brain. Only our
artists and our sports people work with their bodies and only because
they have chosen this.
‘Our highly developed atomic energy is almost inexhaustible,
especially since we have discovered a way to use the atom in a closed
circuit and solar energy. We also have many other sources of energy.
We do not necessarily use uranium in our atomic reactors, but several
other simple and harmless materials.’
‘But if you live so long, and do not work, do you not get bored?’
‘No, never, because we always do things we enjoy doing - especially
making love. We find our women very beautiful, and we make the
most of this.’
‘Does marriage exist?’
‘No. Men and women are both free. Couples exist. Those who have
chosen to live as such may do so, but they may have their freedom
back whenever they wish. We all love one another. Jealousy does not
exist, since everyone can have everything, and property is nonexistent. There is no criminality where we live, thus no prisons and
no police. However, there are many doctors and regular medical visits
for the mind.
Those who show the slightest sign of psychological imbalance that
could threaten the life or liberty of others are immediately given
treatment in order to bring them back to normal.’
‘Can you describe the day of an average individual where you live?’
‘In the morning, they would get up and bathe, since there are
swimming pools everywhere, have breakfast and then do whatever
they feel like doing. Everybody “works”, but only because they feel
like working, as there is no money where we live. Thus those who
work always do it well, since it is by vocation.
Only the eternals have specific tasks, for example supervising the
electronic brains and computers used for dealing with vital functions
such as energy, food and organization. Of the seven billion
inhabitants, there are only 700 eternals, and they live entirely apart
110

T HE E LOHIM - T HE S ECRET O F E TERNITY

from the others. They have the privilege of being eternals but with
this goes the duty of doing everything for the others who are not
obliged to work.
To these 700 eternals, we must add 210 probationers (about
seventy each year, that is to say, ten from each province). Of the seven
billion inhabitants, there are only about forty million children. It is
only when they become of age - between eighteen and twenty-one
years, depending on the individual - that the children undergo the
operation, which gives them a life span of more than 750 years. From
then on, they too may have children. This enables the oldest of our
non-eternal inhabitants to know their descendants for up to fifty
generations.
Out of seven billion inhabitants, there are only about one million
inactive people, and almost all of them are under treatment for
psychological disorders. Our doctors treat them for a period of six
months. Most people are interested in the arts, and they paint, sculpt,
play music, write, produce films and participate in sports etc... We
have a leisure civilization in the full sense of the word.
Our cities have an average population of about 500,000 people
spread over a very small area. A city is in fact a huge house situated in
a high place, inside which people can sleep, love, and do whatever
they please.
These city houses are about one kilometer in length and height and
are traversed in all directions by waves used by everyone for travelling.
You tie on a belt, and then place yourself in a wave current, which
transports you very rapidly to wherever you wish to go.
The cities are cube-like in shape, so that they do not eat up the
countryside as they do where you live. Indeed one of your cities with
say a population of about 500,000 covers a surface area twenty times
greater than ours. The result is that when you want to go into the
country, you have to travel for many hours, whereas in our case, we
are there in only tens of seconds. The same architect conceives an
entire city, so that it will be pleasing to the eye and will harmonize
perfectly with the scenery surrounding it.’
‘But don’t the people who have nothing to do get bored?’
111

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

‘No, because we provide them with numerous activities. The
individual’s true value is recognized, and everyone wants to show that
they have worth.
Whether it be in art, in science or in sports, each person wants to
shine in order to become eternal, or simply to be admired by the
community - or by a woman. Some people like to take risks, and to
deprive them of the risk of dying would take away their joy of living,
and that is why dangerous sports are very popular.
We can bring back to life any injured person, but those who
practice these sports may do so only if they state in writing that they
agree not to be taken care of if they die during their sporting
activities. We have a kind of atomic automobile race that would
fascinate you and more violent activities like boxing, and even more
violent than that, a kind of rugby game, which is played in the nude
and where everything is permitted - boxing, wrestling and so on. All
this may seem barbaric to you, but do not forget that all extremes
must be balanced to avoid breakdowns.
An extremely sophisticated civilization must have primitive
counterbalances. If our people did not have their idols in their
favorite sport, they would have only one wish left, to die. The life of
another individual must be respected, but their wish to die, or to play
with death, must also be respected and permitted within well
structured and well defined specialties.
Where we live, contests are held each year in all branches of the
various activities, one of which is a worldwide contest, permitting us
to decide on the best individuals who deserve eternal life. Everyone
lives only for that.
Each year, whether it be painting, literature, biology, medicine, or
any other specialty where the human brain can express itself, a
competition takes place in every province, with a vote from the
eternals of that province; the “champions” are gathered in the capital
to submit themselves to the vote of a jury of eternals who designate
those who become “champions among champions”.
These people are then presented to the Grand Council of eternals,
who finally choose those who are worthy of becoming eternal
112

T HE E LOHIM - T HE S ECRET O F E TERNITY

probationers. This is the goal and everybody’s ideal. Distractions may
well take on a primitive aspect when the supreme goal is so high.’
‘Does this mean that the eternals have a totally different way of life
from the other inhabitants?’
‘Oh yes. They live apart in cities reserved for them and meet
regularly to make decisions.’
‘How old are the oldest ones?’
‘The oldest, the president of the council of the eternals, is 25,000
years old, and you see him before you now. I have lived in twenty-five
bodies up to this day, and I was the first one on whom this
experiment was successfully carried out. That is why I am the
president of the eternals. I myself directed the creation of life on
Earth.’
‘Then your knowledge must be immeasurable?’
‘Yes, I have accumulated quite a lot of knowledge, and I will not be
able to gain much more. It is in this way that the people on Earth
may be superior to us because the capacity of that part of the brain,
which accumulates information, the memory, is larger. Human
beings on Earth will be able to accumulate more knowledge than us,
and therefore will advance further scientifically, if they have the
means. This is what frightens those who oppose the council of
eternals. People on Earth may progress faster than us, if nothing stops
them.’

Chemical Education
‘The knowledge that students need to accumulate must be enormous,
and must take a very long time?’
‘No. Thanks to an important scientific discovery, which in fact
your scientists on Earth are beginning to consider, we can teach a
student his lessons surgically. Your scientists have just discovered that

113

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

if you inject the liquid from the memory of an educated rat into the
brain of an uneducated rat, it will learn what the other knew.
We can transmit information by the injection of brain memory
matter, thus our children have almost no work to do. They regularly
undergo injections of brain matter taken from people possessing the
information necessary for instruction. Therefore, children only spend
their time doing interesting things, which they decide on themselves,
such as rebuilding the world in theory and fulfilling themselves in
sports and the arts.’
‘You never have wars among the provinces of your world?’
‘Never. The sports competitions are sufficiently developed to
eliminate the war instinct. Besides, psychologically, the fact that
young people are able to risk their lives in games where systematically
there are many deaths during each event suppresses the war instinct.
This enables those who feel this instinct too intensely to satiate it
at the peril of their own life, without involving those who do not
want to travel along such perilous paths. If on Earth sports and games
were more dangerous but organized, it would greatly reduce the
chances of creating international conflicts.’
‘Are the seven provinces of your world similar?’
‘No, as on Earth there are different races and cultures. Our
provinces were created and based on those races and cultures, while
respecting the freedom and independence of each one.’
‘Would it be possible for a man from Earth to visit your planet?’
‘Yes, but you would have to wear a space suit adapted for your
breathing. You could live without such a suit in a special residence
where we have reproduced the Earth’s atmosphere. There, many
people from Earth live, including Moses, Elijah and Jesus Christ
along with many other living testimonies of our creation. We will be
able to bring all these people back to Earth when the time comes to
support your statements.’
‘Why not bring them back at once?’
‘Because in your incredulous world, if Jesus Christ returned, he
would be placed in a psychiatric institution. Imagine someone
landing among you saying he is the Christ. He would certainly be
114

T HE E LOHIM - C HEMICAL E DUCATION

mocked and quickly locked up. If we intervened by performing
scientific wonders to show he really was the Christ, that would bring
back religions based on God. It would also lend support to the idea
of the supernatural or the mystical, and we do not want either.’
Having said that, the small man saluted me for the last time and
told me that he would return only when all that he had asked of me
was accomplished. Then he climbed back aboard his machine, and it
took off and disappeared just as it had on other mornings.

The Raelian Movement
What a story! What a revelation!
After returning home and classifying and copying up the notes I had
taken, I realized the immensity of the task that had been entrusted to
me.
I felt I had little chance of carrying it out. But since it is not
necessary to hope in order to embark on an undertaking, I decided to
do exactly what was asked of me, even though I might be taken for a
visionary. After all, if being a visionary means having received the
light, then I am quite willing to be considered a visionary. It is better
to be called a visionary and know the truth, than to be called
enlightened and not know the truth.
I wish to emphasize to skeptics of all kinds that I never drink
alcohol and sleep very well at night. One can neither dream for six
consecutive days, nor invent all this.
To you who refuse to believe me, I say: Watch the sky, and you will
see more and more sights that neither our scientists nor the military
will be able to explain - except by foolish babblings aimed at saving
reputations which they believe they would lose if the truth did not
originate from someone in their closed circle. How could a scientist
possibly not know?

115

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Those who condemned Copernicus - because he dared to say the
Earth was not the center of the universe - could never admit that
someone other than themselves could reveal all that.
But all of you who have seen or will see unidentified flying objects,
which some people will explain away as dreams, or weather balloons,
or even hallucinations, and all of you who dare not talk about it for
fear of being mocked, it is only by getting together with those who
believe that you will be able to speak freely.
All these revelations brought me such a sense of well-being and
such an inner peacefulness in this world where we do not know what
to believe, where we cannot believe in a white bearded God or in a
hoofed devil, and where official scientists cannot give precise
explanations of our origins and our goals.
In the light of these amazing revelations, everything becomes so
clear and seems so simple. Knowing that somewhere in the universe,
there is a planet full of people who created us similar to themselves,
who love us, all the while fearing that their creations might surpass
them - is this not profoundly moving? Especially if one thinks that we
will, in turn, be able to participate in the evolution of this Humanity,
of which we are a part, like them, by creating life on other worlds.
Now that you have read this book that I have written, in which I
have tried to set out as clearly as possible all that was said to me, if
you simply think that I have a great imagination and that these
writings were produced just to amuse you, then I will be profoundly
disappointed.
But perhaps, on the other hand, these revelations will give you
confidence in the future and allow you to understand the mystery of
creation and the destiny of humanity. Perhaps they will answer the
many questions that you have asked yourselves at night ever since
your childhood, wondering why we exist and what our purpose is on
this Earth. If this happens, I shall be very happy indeed.
Finally, if you understand that all I have said here is the profound
truth and wish, as I do, to see these people land here officially very
soon to give us their heritage, and if you want to play a part in
116

T HE E LOHIM - T HE R AELIAN M OVEMENT

realizing all that was asked of me, then I will have fulfilled my mission
in writing this book.
If this is the case, write to me, and we will welcome you into the
Raelian Movement. We will build the residence that they desire, and
when we are numerous enough all over the world to wait for them
with the respect and love that those who created us would have the
right to demand, then they will come, and we will become the
beneficiaries of their immense knowledge.
To all of you who believe in God or in Jesus Christ, I say you were
right in such a belief. Even if you thought all was not exactly as the
Church would have you believe, there was a foundation of truth. You
were right to believe in the basis of the scriptures, but wrong to
sustain the Church. If you continue to distribute your money to
provide cardinals with the finest vestments, and at your expense
continue to authorize the existence of the military and their nuclear
threat, then it means that you wish to remain primitive and are not
interested in entering the golden age to which we are now entitled.
If, however, you wish to participate passively or actively, according
to your means, in the creation and development of the Raelian
Movement, take your pen and write to me. We will very soon be
numerous enough to choose a piece of land on which the embassy
will be built. If you still have doubts, read the papers and look at the
sky. You will see that sightings of mysterious crafts are becoming
more and more numerous, and this will give you the courage to send
your letter to me, addressed to:
Rael,
c/o: International Raelian Movement
C.P. 225, CH1211
Geneva 8
Switzerland
Or by email to: headquarters@rael.org

117

B
O
O
K
T
W
O
___________________________________
EXTRA-TERRESTRIALS TOOK ME TO THEIR PLANET

1
MY LIFE UNTIL

THE

FIRST ENCOUNTER

Introduction

W

hen I started this second book I wanted simply to relate what
my life had been like before my fantastic encounter of 13
December 1973, to answer the many people who had asked firstly
what I had done before that time, and secondly whether anything
extraordinary had happened to me during my childhood that could
have foreshadowed such a destiny.
I was surprised myself as I searched my memories, for even though
I thought that nothing extraordinary had occurred at the beginning
of my life, I found scenes resurfacing, which formed a whole when
put together, and I saw that my life had really been guided for me to
be what I was and to find myself where I did on December 13, 1973.
I had almost finished writing this account when the second
encounter took place. Consequently, I have summed up my early
memories briefly in order to give as much space as possible to the
second part of this message and to provide a full account of this
second contact, which turned out to be even more fantastic than the
first.

121

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Two Years Have Passed
Two years! For almost two years now I have been trying somehow to
radiate this truth, which is too great for me. Time goes by, and I feel
I am getting nowhere. Yet, little by little, a solid core of people is
forming around me, people who understand that The Book Which
Tells the Truth really does just that.
There are seven hundred of them as I pen these lines, and I
understand how this is both few and many at the same time. Few
when we consider the four billion people who populate the Earth,
and many when we consider how few people had decided, after two
years, to follow the man who, two thousand years ago, had the
equally heavy burden of being initiated and then initiating the
primitive people of his time.
Who are these seven hundred? Are they, as the scoffers would no
doubt love to believe, average simpletons who could be made to
swallow anything? Not at all. Some of them are university graduates
or people holding PhD’s in philosophy, psychology, theology,
sociology, medicine, physics, chemistry, etc.
My admiration perhaps goes as much to those who have no degree,
since although they have not acquired knowledge through studying
that would allow them to realize that living matter and people like us
can be created scientifically, they are still able to feel it intuitively, as
people capable of mastering matter and putting themselves in
harmony with the universe that they are.
I must say that I am optimistic on the whole, and that I believe that
I have so far accomplished the mission that has been entrusted to me.
For whatever happens to me, MADECH is up and running, and
nothing will ever be able to stop it.
In two years I have given nearly forty lectures, and since certain
questions come up regularly, I suppose some parts of the message
need to be clarified. So I will try to do that in this work.
First of all, what path did I follow before the encounter of 13
December 1973?
122

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - T WO Y EARS H AVE PASSED

I have to admit I have only recently begun to look back on my life
to figure out exactly how it had been guided for me to be available
and ready to go into action on the spiritual, psychic and emotional
levels at that time.
Certain events in my childhood had never seemed to me to have
the least meaning when taken separately - but they did when taken
together.
Now it all seems very clear to me, and I am moved when I
remember some things that I considered unimportant at the time
they occurred. Far be it from me to tell my life story in a way that
suggests that each event in it was exceptional, but it seems that many
people want to know more about what had happened to me before.
Also, rather than leave it to wagging tongues, I would rather tell it all
myself.

Childhood: a UFO over Ambert
As the child of an unknown father, I cannot say that I had a typical
childhood. I was what is called a “natural” child - as if all others were
“artificial” children.
My birth was an accident as it were, at least for the little town of
Ambert, which is so devoutly Catholic that it is known as the “world
capital of the rosary”. Furthermore, the unknown father, who was not
totally unknown, was apparently a Jewish refugee. What sacrilege!
My birth was concealed as much as possible - not in a cave, but in
a clinic at nearby Vichy. It occurred on 30 September 1946 at about
two o’clock in the morning and was a very difficult one. But the
important thing is that I was conceived on 25 December 1945.
Conception, the moment when a being truly begins to exist and
develop in the womb of its mother, is the true date of birth for each
individual. December 25 has been a very important date for almost

123

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

two thousand years now. For those who believe in coincidences, my
life began with a coincidence.
When we returned to Ambert, my poor mother tried for quite a
long while to pass me off as “the son of a friend she was taking care
of for a while” to her father who, even though he held it against her
when he learned the truth, proved to be the nicest of grandfathers to
me during the short time I knew him. Sadly, he died when I was still
a very young child. I was later told about how amused he looked
when, having seen him trim his fruit trees, I took a pair of scissors to
cut... his lettuce.
I was raised by my grandmother and my aunt who were then, and
still are, living together. They taught me to read and helped me take
my first steps, which I remember very clearly - surely the earliest
memory of my life.
It was only very recently that my grandmother told me that in
1947 she saw a strange craft flying very quickly and noiselessly over
Ambert near her house. She had never dared tell anyone about it for
fear of being accused of hallucinating. It was only after reading my
book that she decided to talk to me about it... and at the same time
she decided to join MADECH. Her decision to join was, in fact, one
of the most important forms of encouragement that I received.

The Pope of the Druids
In Ambert there was an old man of whom small children were afraid,
and of whom the grown-ups made fun. They nicknamed him “Jesus
Christ” because he had very long hair rolled up in a bun and a
magnificent beard.
He was always clad in a long cape that came down to his ankles,
and he lived about a hundred meters from the house where my
mother had found a small apartment. He did not work, and nobody

124

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - T HE P OPE O F T HE D RUIDS

knew how he could afford to live in the minuscule house in front of
the municipal grammar school.
As they got older, the children lost their fear of him, and like their
parents, started to make fun of him, laughing and making faces as
they followed at his heels.
Personally, I did not enjoy playing with the others, preferring to
contemplate insects and look at books. I had passed this man in the
street several times and had been surprised by his face, which radiated
great kindness, and by the mischievous smile he wore whenever he
looked at me. I did not know why, but he did not scare me, and I did
not see anything laughable about him. Also I did not understand why
the other children made fun of him.
One afternoon I followed him, curious about where he was going,
and saw him go into his house, leaving open the door that led into a
small, very dark kitchen. I went closer and could see him sitting on a
stool with the mischievous smile on his face, as if he were expecting
me. He motioned for me to come nearer. I went inside the house and
moved towards him.
He laid his hand on my head, and I felt a strange sensation. At the
same time, he looked up in the air and uttered some words that I did
not understand. After a few minutes had passed, he let me go, still
without saying a word, and still smiling the same mysterious smile.
All this had me puzzled at the time, but I very quickly forgot about
it. It was only in the summer of 1974, when reading a book that my
mother had lent me about the mysteries of Auvergne, that I learned
that Father Dissard, the old man in question, was the last Dissard that is, the last living “Pope” of the Druids - and that he had been
dead for several years.
Then I recalled the scene from my childhood, and thought again
of the mysterious smile that the old man used to give me each time I
passed him in the street - which was every day, since we had been
virtually neighbors. I now know exactly who he was addressing when
he looked up in the air and uttered those mysterious phrases, just as
I know exactly what the silent, luminous machine was that my
grandmother had seen.
125

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

One other thing also comes to mind again. After the scene that
took place at Father Dissard’s house, I went to sleep every evening
counting up to nine a certain number of times.
This is a number that has frequently come up in my life, like a code
that has been assigned to me. I have never been able to explain this
sudden habit, which began several years after I had learned to count
much higher than nine, and therefore could not have been the result
of learning by rote. I was seven years old when this incident took
place.

Poetry
At that time what mattered most to me were animals, which I loved
to draw all day long, when I was not organizing snail races. I was
fascinated by animal life, and I dreamt then only of becoming an
explorer, so as to be able to get near the mysterious fauna of the virgin
forests.
But at nine years of age - the number nine again - everything was
to change. First of all, I was discovering what was to become a true
passion for me - speed. Speed that is, on everything with wheels, with
or without an engine. Speed and especially balance, the sense of
trajectory and the struggle against oneself, against one’s own reflexes
- in fact, the ultimate mastery of mind over body.
It started with wild downhill runs on a little bicycle with almost no
brakes, and I wonder how it was that I did not fall a single time. To
liven things up, I would position myself at the top of a hill and wait
for a fast car to pass by. Then I would launch into dizzying pursuit,
catch up with the car and pass it - to the driver’s great surprise - and,
once at the bottom of the hill, I would turn and go back to wait at
the top for another car.
A few months later, I found myself by chance attending the Tour
de France motor race, and it was love at first sight. It was possible, I
126

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - P OETRY

then realized, to know the joys of high speed without having to pedal
back up a hill. And you could make it your job.
I made up my mind, the way you can when you are nine years old.
I would be a race-car driver.
From that day on, my life was centered only around motor racing.
Nothing else interested me, and I did not see the point of learning all
they taught me at school, since I was going to be a racing driver.
Children’s comics were replaced by serious motor magazines, and I
impatiently began counting off the years that separated me from the
age when I could obtain a driver’s license.
It was also at the age of nine that I had my first experience of
boarding school. My mother was in despair because I no longer
wanted to do anything at school, and I constantly told her that such
learning was useless for motor racing drivers. So she decided to send
me to the Notre-Dame-de-France boarding school in Puy-en-Velay.
She hoped that, without motor racing magazines, I would apply
myself to school work, and in a way she was not far wrong. But I have
very bad memories of that first boarding school, almost certainly
because I was too young when I was sent there.
I remember that I spent many nights crying in a huge dormitory,
where what I now believe I missed most was the chance to be alone
and meditate.
This need, which caused me to spend entire nights crying, further
increased my already great sensitivity, as will any emotional or
affectionate need that is denied.
Then I discovered poetry.
I had always been more attracted to literature than to mathematics,
although only as an interested and passive reader. Then came the
desire, the need to write - in verse if possible. I remained uninterested
in mathematics, yet I had now achieved a solid average in that subject
as in all others. But in French language, and especially writing, I
regularly came first, as long as I liked the set subject. I even wrote an
entire collection of poems and won first prize in a poetry
competition.
127

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The most surprising thing was that even though I had not been
baptized, I was in a private boarding school run by Catholic monks,
with all the praying which that involves - prayers before eating, and
going to bed, before rising in the morning, before studying - and
attending daily mass with communion. When, after six months of
daily communion the brethren discovered that I had not been
baptized, they seemed utterly horrified. I actually thought it was
funny; it was in fact the only part of their mass that I liked, this free
tasting of morsels of bread.
It was also at the age of nine that I attained puberty. I enjoyed it
very much and discovering unknown and secret pleasures, which no
other nine year-old in the dormitory seemed yet to know about, was
some consolation for my incomplete solitude.
Finally, it was at the age of nine that I fell in love for the first time
- and it was the intense kind of love that can seize children at that age.
Due to my improved classroom results, my mother had agreed not to
send me back to boarding school, and I found myself in the fourth
grade at the municipal grammar school in Ambert. There she was,
nine years old or almost, and her name was Brigitte. I was shy and
blushed quite ridiculously. It took only a glance during a medical
visit, or perhaps a gesture of modesty to hide a non-existent bosom
from my eyes, to release in me feelings of tenderness and a great desire
to protect this apparently fragile being.
The following year I found myself at the same school, in the fifth
grade, in the company of my first love to whom I dared not even
speak. Still, I managed to end up sitting one desk in front of her at
the beginning of the school year, so that I could turn my head from
time to time and admire her beloved face. I was only ten and was
always thinking about her.
The fact that I was close to her in class spurred me on, and I set
myself to work hard enough to avoid having to repeat a year. In this
way, I moved up to the sixth grade without the least interest in my
studies.
Unfortunately, we were now constantly changing classes and had
different teachers instead of just one. As a result, I was almost always
128

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - P OETRY

separated from her and did practically no work - so much so that the
next year I found myself back in a boarding school in the small village
of Cunlhat, which is about thirty kilometers from Ambert.
It was even worse there than it had been at Puy-en-Velay. We were
all crammed into a tiny dormitory that was barely heated. and worst
of all, there was virtually no discipline. So the biggest and strongest
boys enforced their own law. I think that is where I developed such a
hatred of violence.
One day, fed up with being bullied by boys against whom no
disciplinary measures were ever taken, I took to the road on foot,
determined to cover the thirty kilometers that separated me from my
maternal home. Nobody noticed my departure, and when the school
principal caught up with me in his car, I had already walked nearly
ten kilometers.
To my great delight, I was kicked out of the school and sent back
to the Catholic brethren at Ambert in the middle of the school year
as a day boy. What joy! I could now see Brigitte every day in the
street. By then she was twelve, her small bosom was budding
deliciously, and to me she was more beautiful than ever.
I grew less and less interested in my studies and began to taste the
joys of playing truant, mainly because I did not like finding myself
back among the priests, who had quickly advised my mother to have
me baptized. Fortunately, she preferred to wait until I was old enough
to understand, so that she could ask my opinion.
What I would have liked at that time was to become a garage
mechanic because I had learned that this was a useful skill for racing
drivers. My mother, who hoped I would become an engineer, wanted
me at all costs to continue with my studies, so she would not allow
me to become apprenticed to a garage.
This new harassment gave me the desire to write poems again, and
I started pacing about in the country with a notebook in my hand
instead of attending classes.
At fourteen I found myself back in boarding school once more, this
time in Mont-Dore, at a grammar school where they take children
not wanted by any of the other schools in the region.
129

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

I found myself in the company of a fairly interesting collection of
dunces and “hard cases”. It was one of the latter, a typical boarding
school “big shot”, who ended up being responsible for the direction
I took during the next ten years of my life. His name was Jacques, and
he played the electric guitar, which quite impressed me. As soon as
the Christmas holidays came, I got my grandmother to buy me a
magnificent guitar, and Jacques taught me a few chords. Then I
started setting my poems to music and noticed that it was apparently
very pleasing to those who listened. As soon as the summer holidays
came, I began to enter some radio singing contests, which I almost
always won.
It was also during that summer vacation that I discovered physical
love for the first time - with a barmaid who had been enchanted by
my songs. She was twenty years old and did not teach me much apart
from the effects that the guitar can have on women.
The following year I was fifteen and wanted more than ever to live
my own life. One day I took my guitar under my arm along with a
small suitcase, said farewell to the boarding school with its
uninteresting studies, and hitchhiked to Paris. I had two thousand
old francs in my pocket and a heart full of hope. At last I was going
to earn my own living, save up enough money to take my driving test
at the age of eighteen and become a racing driver.
By a stroke of luck a man driving a car that had tremendous
acceleration hidden beneath discreet-looking bodywork picked me
up. When he told me he was a racing driver and gave me his name, I
was able to tell him which car he had driven and the awards he had
won. He was flattered and surprised, little known as he was, to meet
a young boy who remembered all his achievements. He told me that
he had once been a clown, and that he now owned a garage in the
southwest. When we arrived in Paris, he invited me out to dinner and
even offered me a room in the hotel where he was staying.
In the lounge, we chatted a bit with two young women who were
dance hostesses in a bar and had finished their day’s work. I sang
some songs, and then we went to bed each with one of our charming
companions. There I was truly initiated into physical lovemaking.
130

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - P OETRY

The next morning, I left discreetly because I wanted to find a room
and some cabarets that would be interested in my songs. I did not
find either and spent my second night in Paris in the subway with the
tramps.
I had not a penny left, and the next morning, I was starving. I
spent my day dawdling and despairing of ever sorting anything out.
But that evening I saw a man playing an accordion on a cafe terrace,
and the customers were throwing him coins. I decided to try the same
thing, and right from the start, it worked very well. I was saved.
I lived like that for three years, often sleeping anywhere and eating
a sandwich from time to time. But I made enormous progress, and
one day I was hired by a small cabaret on the Left Bank. I made ten
francs each night and needed fifteen for the taxi ride back to
Montmartre, where I lived in a small room. Yet I had my name on
the poster - although in small print! Already I was imagining my
name high up on the poster in big letters, seeing the success I was
having every night.
One day I met the actor Jean-Pierre Darras who advised me to take
acting classes to improve my stage presence. Since I did not have the
means to pay for them, he kindly arranged for me to attend a course
at the National Theatre of Paris free of charge. So for three months I
took the Dullin course - and then gave it up because I did not feel at
all attracted to the theatre.
I used to introduce myself at the time under the pseudonym of
Claude Celler, which I had chosen as a tribute to the skier and
champion racing driver, Tony Sailer. I modified the spelling so that
my initials would become C C. - retaining my real first name.
I began to win a lot of radio contests, and by singing in several
cabarets, I was able to live reasonably well, and more importantly, to
save up enough money to take my driving test at exactly eighteen, as
planned.
But that was not enough to become a racing driver. First I had to
make a name for myself in the hope of being hired by a major
company, and for that I needed to have a competition car, participate
in some races independently and, if possible, win them. A racing car
131

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

is very expensive, and I had to continue saving in the hope of
acquiring such a vehicle. I continued with my singing and tried to
put some money aside. Many writer-composer friends had made
recordings and seemed to be making a lot of money from them. So I
decided to try it, having by now more than 150 songs in my bag.
The first recording firm that I approached offered me a three-year
contract, which I signed. The director of the recording firm was
Lucien Morisse, the director of the radio station Europe No. 1, which
had launched a tremendous number of famous singers. My first
record was fairly successful, and the second, thanks to a song called
Le Miel et la Canelle (Honey and Cinnamon), was even more popular.
It was often heard on the radio:
HONEY AND CINNAMON
I smell honey and cinnamon
I smell vanilla and love
I smell honey and cinnamon
Girls I’ll always adore.
The first was a brunette, Margot was her name
We played the pipes as the moon lit the night
I took the road to her eyes
And followed the way to her hair.
The second was a blonde, her name was Marielle
The path around her curves I remember well
I took the road to her eyes
And followed the way to her hair.
The third was a redhead, Marion she was called
For her lovely little face and her frothy underslip
I took the road to her eyes
And followed the way to her hair.

132

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - P OETRY

Don’t cry, my friend, for tomorrow will be spring
They are so lovely and you’re not twenty yet
I took the road to her eyes
And you can travel the path to her hair.

I was giving many performances and taking part in many road
shows. Everything was going well, and I even had the pleasure of
being selected to participate in the Golden Rose song contest held in
Antibes.
But those who were guiding me did not really want me to become
too famous an artist. That stage of my life had been planned to
develop my sensitivity, and to accustom me to expressing myself in
public, but no more than that.
Even though the fact that I was among the contestants selected for
the Golden Rose was being announced on the radio every morning,
Lucien Morisse came to me one day and explained that he had to
withdraw me from the contest. He said that I would understand why
later, but he could not tell me more at that moment.
So, in the end, I did not participate in that Golden Rose contest
but had to continue to live on what I could earn from my singing,
which I realized, would never be enough to buy a car that would get
me into racing.
Therefore, when I was offered the opportunity to become a
representative for the company where I did my recording, I accepted
immediately, convinced that I would be able to save up enough for a
car in a few months.
I found myself back in Bordeaux, where I was a commercial agent
in charge of fifteen regions. I stayed there for a year and left when at
last I had enough money to buy myself a competition car. I just had
time to break that car in before a friend wrote it off in an accident.
However, I had composed new songs during the year in Bordeaux,
and a wealthy friend urged me to make another record, which he
would finance himself.

133

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

I spent another year living on my poetry and then, as if to make
me change my lifestyle radically, I was involved in a very serious car
accident.
On a very tiring tour I fell asleep at the wheel of my car and struck
a wall head on, at about 100km per hour - 60 mph. More than ten
people had already died at that spot. I came out of it with several
fractures, but alive. I was immobilized for three months or more and
my savings ran out. I was still not racing. I, who had dreamt of
starting out at eighteen, had still not entered a single race by the age
of twenty-two.
Having been to racing circuits many times as a spectator, I had
noticed how infatuated young people were with this sport, and also
the number of boys who wanted to be racing drivers without
knowing how to proceed. I did not know much more than they did,
and told myself that the best way for me to enter the racing scene
would be to find a career that took advantage of their enthusiasm. I
knew how to write, so the solution was obvious.
I would become a reporter for a sports car magazine.
I got in touch with a number of specialist magazines, but in vain
because so many other young people had come up with the same
idea. Then I noticed a small advertisement in the motor section of L
‘Equipe from someone looking for photographer-reporters, no
experience required.
I wrote, and the advertiser replied saying that my application was
being considered, but that I had to send 150 francs for administrative
costs. In exchange, I would receive some film to make a test report on
a subject of my choice. I sent the money, got back the film, wrote the
report - on a motor race, of course - and immediately sent it to the
address indicated.
Very soon afterwards, I received a letter asking me to call a number
in Dijon, where the head office of the firm that had placed the
advertisement was situated. I met the head of the publishing
company - a man of about thirty years of age who claimed to have
made a fortune in photography in the United States.
134

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - P OETRY

He seemed to be very interested in my ideas about the creation of
a sports car magazine intended for young people who hoped to
become racing drivers and offered to hire me as editor-in-chief of a
newspaper that was to come out in a few months’ time. He showed
me the factory that he was going to buy to set up his printing office,
introduced me to the printer in Dijon whom he had hired to be the
director, and showed me the house where my wife and I could live, at
a stone’s throw from my office.
I replied that it would suit me, provided I could cover and
participate in races. He then told me that he was also looking for
someone capable of running a competitions department, since he
intended to launch the new newspaper by racing some cars painted
in his own colors. That would enable me to be right where the action
was, and I agreed to be the director of the competitions department
for this company.
A week later, I moved from Paris to Dijon with my wife, MariePaul. I had been married for about three months, and she was
expecting our daughter. I had met Marie-Paule in the month of June,
and we had not left each other’s side since the first day we met. We
had married three months later, only because her family was shocked
to learn that we had no intention of getting married religiously. Her
family was very old-fashioned, and at first I prayed with them before
meals.
My stay in Dijon, however, lasted only two months, and I received
no salary. It transpired that the “rich American” who had wanted to
create a newspaper had in fact just come out of prison without a
penny. He had swindled sums of money ranging from 150 francs to
300 francs from more than 500 young people dreaming, like me, of
becoming racing drivers or photographer-reporters.
I had worked two months for nothing, and I found myself full of
ideas, but penniless. This time I decided to make a start alone in the
great world of publishing. I moved to Clermont-Ferrand, close to my
mother who was then looking forward to becoming a grandparent
very soon, and started my own publishing house to produce a
magazine in my own way. This magazine was soon born, thanks to a
135

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

printer who also loved sports cars and who agreed to take the risk of
extending me credit, although I could not give him any form of
guarantee.
The magazine took off quickly and soon became one of the leaders
in its field. I reserved for myself the most interesting task - test driving
new models on the magnificent circuit of Mas-du-Clos, at Creuse,
and on the road. By this means I gained entry into the world of
motor sport, and cars were lent to me to race. At last my dream was
becoming a reality, and what is more, I found from the start that I
was a gifted competition driver, gaining many victories with cars that
were unfamiliar to me.
For three marvelous years I lived like this, all the time making
continuous progress with my driving technique and concentrating
100 per cent on the field that I loved - that of sports cars. I must say
that I felt a real pleasure in steadily pushing back my limitations and
constantly improving control of my reflexes and reactions. However,
I did not care for either engine noise or the smell of burning fuel, and
I dreamed of days to come when racing car manufacturers would be
required to make their cars odorless and noiseless. Only then could I
enjoy fully the sensation of driving at its purest level.
But all this was turned upside down towards the end of 1973.

The Encounter
On that extraordinary day, 13 December, 1973, I found myself in a
crater of an Auvergne volcano, the Puy-de-Lassolas. There, as I have
already described, I met for the first time an extra-terrestrial man, or
more precisely, the Eloha - singular of Elohim - whom I would meet
at the same place for six consecutive days and who, for about one
hour each time, would dictate to me the fantastic revelations of The
Book Which Tells The Truth.

136

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - T HE E NCOUNTER

For the first few days following this experience I must confess I
wondered if I would dare tell anyone at all about it. The first thing I
did was to make a neat copy of the notes that I had taken as best I
could, although far too quickly as my interlocutor spoke to me.
When this was finished, I sent the original manuscript to a serious
publisher who to my knowledge did not publish esoteric works or
science fiction. Obviously I did not want this message of such
importance to humanity to be lost among collections of mysterious
adventure stories or occult books that cater for people interested in
alternative sciences.
Marcel Jullian, who ran the publishing house, invited me to Paris
and told me that the manuscript was sensational. But he said that I
must tell my life story before talking about the message, and that
there might be “a few little changes to be made”.
All that was absolutely out of the question. I did not want to take
up a hundred pages telling my life story and then present the message
that I had received, as if my personality were as important as those
things which I had been asked to reveal. I wanted the message
published, but only the message, even if it was not a thick book and
thereby lacked interest for a publisher. So I asked Monsieur Jullian to
return my manuscript. He replied that he did not have it because a
reader had borrowed it, but that as soon as it was returned he would
mail it to me.
I had just returned to Clermont-Ferrand when I received a
telegram inviting me to return to Paris to appear in a television show
named the Great Chess Board, presented by Jacques Chancel. He was
the director of a series in the publishing house to which I had sent my
manuscript. He had read it and understood that it was absolutely
fantastic, whether anyone believed it or not. So I took part in the
show, and the thousands of letters that I received afterwards showed
that, while some laughed, many had taken what I said very seriously
and wanted to help.
But days went by, and my manuscript was not returned. I sent a
registered letter to the publisher, who replied that the manuscript
would be sent to me, but that they had not yet found it. After ten
137

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

days I went back to Paris to see if I could do something personally
because nobody wanted to answer my questions any more when I
telephoned to ask about the matter.
The famous designer, Courrèges, who had contacted me after the
television show because he was interested, agreed to come with me to
see the publisher in order to find out what exactly had become of the
manuscript.
Marcel Jullian told us that the reader who had the manuscript had
taken it with him on holiday, but they did not know where he was or
how to reach him. The situation was becoming stranger and stranger.
In the end the manuscript was retrieved by Monsieur Courrèges,
and he returned it to me personally. I still wonder if it had really been
lost or just put away to prevent it from being published. If that
publishing house really mislaid the manuscript so easily, then I would
discourage other authors from sending their originals to them.
Alarmed by the mishap and by the growing pile of letters from
people interested in buying the book containing the message as soon
as it was published, Marie-Paule offered to leave her nursing job to
help me with the publishing and distribution of this exceptional
document.
I accepted because I was sure that this way, I would have
permanent control over the use of these writings. Since it was
incompatible with the seriousness of the mission that I had been
given, I immediately stopped working for the sports magazine, and in
the autumn of 1974, the book finally rolled off the printing press.
The shock to my nervous system caused by this unforeseen upset
in my life had given me stomach pains and almost brought on an
ulcer. All winter I suffered from a serious case of gastritis. No
medication was effective, and it was only after I decided to take it easy
by doing some meditation and breathing exercises that the pains
vanished, as if by magic.
In June, I had been on a television show hosted by Philippe
Bouvard. It was called Saturday Evening, and sarcastic as always,
Monsieur Bouvard disguised his co-host as a Martian with pink
138

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - T HE E NCOUNTER

antennae and a green suit, and asked me if he looked like the person
I had met.
But many people, interested by the little I had been able to say,
wrote to Philippe Bouvard, reproaching him for his lack of
seriousness. Confronted by the thousands of letters he received, he
decided to invite me back to do another show where I would be able
to say a little more. Convinced that I would not be allowed to say
enough, I decided to hire the Pleyel Hall for a date just after the
television show and to announce to interested viewers that I would
give a talk there in a few days’ time. I hired a hall to seat 150, with
an option on another to seat 500, as I did not know how many
people would want to bother to come and listen to me.
In the end, more than 3,000 people came. Quite obviously we
could only accommodate 500 in the hall I had booked, and when
these seats were filled, we advised the others that I would give another
talk in a few days in the great hall with 2,000 seats. Obviously, many
people were not happy to leave, some of them having traveled several
hundred kilometers.
In the end, everything went well, and I found that a great number
of people were ready to help and support me, apart, of course, from
those cynics whose questions, by virtue of their superficiality, I was
able to show up as ridiculous.
Even though I had dreadful stage fright, much more than I had
ever had when singing, everything went without a hitch, and the
answers to the most difficult questions seemed to come to my lips by
themselves. I really felt help coming from above, just as the Elohim
had promised me. I had the impression of listening to myself give
answers that I could not possibly have come up with alone.
The second talk took place a few days later. I was afraid that those
who had not been able to get into the hall the first time would not
come back, and that I would therefore find myself stuck with a very
expensive hall nearly three quarters empty especially since there had
not been any publicity about it since the television program, except
for a short, three-line paragraph in France Soir, the only newspaper
that would agree to publicize this second talk.
139

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

In the end, well over two thousand people came, and the hall was
full. It was a triumph. From this time onward, I did not have any
further doubts about the success of my mission.

The Public Talks
From the month of September 1974 onwards, over the course of
some forty lectures, I was able to see which questions came up most
frequently. I also saw the membership of MADECH rising
constantly, as regional offices formed in all the big towns of France
around the most dynamic and active members.
I also saw some reporters pursuing their craft honestly and well,
their job being to inform the public by writing or saying exactly what
they had seen or read about. However, some like those from the
newspaper, Le Point, wrote lies. Even after registered letters were sent
to remind them that they had to rectify an inaccurate article in
conformity with the right to respond, they did not do so properly.
Others, like those at the newspaper, La Montagne, simply refused
to inform their readers that I was giving a talk in Clermont-Ferrand
and exploited the fact that they were the only daily newspaper in that
region. Their news director had in fact met me and said that never
would my activities or I be mentioned in his newspaper. All this was
because they did not like the fact that when I appeared initially on
television, I had not first informed them before talking to a major
French broadcasting organization - a sad story and a fine example of
freedom of speech. They even refused to run a paid advertisement
announcing that talk, although in the same newspaper there were
full-page advertisements for pornographic movies.
As for the newspaper, Le Point, it simply transformed an excursion
of MADECH members to the place where the encounter had
occurred into a broken appointment with the Elohim.

140

M Y L IFE U NTIL T HE F IRST E NCOUNTER - T HE P UBLIC TALKS

These tricks were played in an attempt to ridicule an organization
trying to get off the ground. It is evidently easier and less dangerous
for a newspaper with an extensive readership to do this to a new
organization like MADECH than to the Church, with its 2,000 years
of usurpation.
But the day will come when those who have tried to hide or twist
the truth will regret their mistakes.

141

2
THE SECOND ENCOUNTER

The Sighting of July 31st, 1975

I

t was during June 1975 that I decided to resign as president of
MADECH, first of all because it seemed that the movement could
now manage very well without me, and secondly because I thought I
had made a mistake in structuring the organization in accordance
with a 1901 law that likened the movement, which is of such
importance to humanity, to a petanque club or a war veterans’
association.
I thought it was necessary to create a movement more in harmony
with the fantastic message the Elohim had transmitted to me. This
required a movement that respected to the letter what our creators
had advised - namely geniocracy, humanitarianism, the renunciation
of all deistic religious practices, and so on.
Any association based on that 1901 law ran contrary to the meaning
of the Elohim’s message by definition, at least in the way we had
structured it. Since all members of such an association could vote, we
were not respecting the principles of geniocracy, according to which
only the most intelligent people may take part in making decisions.
So I had to correct this fundamental mistake, not by going so far as
to abolish MADECH, but rather by transforming it, pending more
effective modification of its structure. This would not run contrary to
the regulations of the 1901 law.

142

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE S IGHTING

OF

J ULY 31 ST, 1975

In this way, MADECH would become an organization that would
support the real movement that I was going to create with its most
open-minded members - in effect, a congregation of MADECH
guides. This new association would bring together those people who
wished to open others’ minds to infinity and eternity and become
guides for humanity by scrupulously applying what was required in
the Elohim’s message. So, in a society seeking to close people’s minds
in every way with deistic religions, soporific education, unthinking
television programs and petty political battles, I was going to try to
initiate people who would go out into the world and attempt to open
23
the minds of others. Thus MADECH would retain its importance
by becoming a support organization that would be the first point of
contact for those discovering the Elohim’s message. It would be made
up of practicing members, and the congregation of guides was going
to be a movement made up of “monks” guiding those practicing
members.
I knew that there were people among the MADECH members
who were quite capable of managing the organization, and I received
confirmation of this during the elections to the administrative
council. My replacement as president, Christian, was a physicist with
a promising future, and the rest of the council was made up of people
who were all equally representative and competent.
It was also in the month of June that François, one of the most
devoted MADECH members and one of the most open-minded,
came to see me in Clermont-Ferrand. I told him about my desire to
find a country house in as secluded a place as possible, in order to rest
a little and calmly write a book in which I would relate all that had
happened to me prior to 13 December 1973, before anyone could
invent a lot of nonsense about my past. He told me that he had a
farm in an out of the way place in Périgord, and that if I liked the
area, I could spend a month or two there, and even stay as long as I
wished, since nobody lived there.
We immediately drove off to visit the place, and inspired by the
peace and quiet that I found there, I decided to stay for two months.
143

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

After two weeks, I was enjoying it so much that I seriously considered
settling there more permanently.
François came back to join us at the end of July, and we started
planning the move for the day after a celebration meeting at
Clermont-Ferrand on the 6th of August. I still had not decided for
sure because I was afraid I might fail in my mission somehow if I
moved away from the place of my marvelous encounter. However, on
July 31st, while my wife Marie-Paule, Francois and I were out getting
some fresh air, we saw what must have been an enormous craft
passing silently and with jerky movements almost over the house.
At times it moved with unimaginable speed, but it also stopped
suddenly several times, proceeding in a zigzag pattern like this about
500 meters from where we stood. I was delighted that other people
were with me to witness the event, and an indescribable feeling of
happiness came over me. François told me that the hairs on his head
stood on end from emotion. To me, it was an obvious sign of the
Elohim’s consent to my moving to that area.
The next morning I noticed that I had a strange mark on the bicep
of one arm, close to the fold of my elbow. I did not immediately
make the connection to the sighting of the day before, but later many
people told me that it could only have been a mark made by the
Elohim. It was a red circle about three centimeters in diameter, its
circumference was five millimeters thick, and inside it were three
smaller circles.(Fig.1)
This mark stayed the same for the next two weeks, then the three
circles in the middle merged into one, making two concentric
circles.(Fig.2) Then, after another two weeks, the two circles
disappeared, leaving a white spot on my arm, which I still have. I
wish to emphasize the fact that I never suffered from that mark, and
that I did not feel the least itching during the entire time I had it.
Some open-minded scientists to whom I showed the mark speculated
that it could have been made while a sample was being taken with the
help of a perfected laser.

144

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE S IGHTING

OF

J ULY 31 ST, 1975

Fig.1

Fig.2

The reunion of August 6th finally took place as planned in the
crater of Puy-de-Lassolas, near Clermont-Ferrand, and at that
meeting a splendid feeling of fraternity and harmony prevailed.
I had decided to hold this gathering of MADECH members on
this date without really knowing why, but in fact the Elohim had
guided me because on the day of the meeting some members
informed me that it was the thirtieth anniversary to the day of the
atomic bomb explosion at Hiroshima, and that it was also a Christian
holiday, the Transfiguration.
Fools will say that it was a coincidence.
After that meeting, some MADECH members helped me to move,
and I settled down to live in Périgord.

The Message: Part Two
On October 7th, at around eleven o’clock at night, I felt a sudden
urge to go out and look at the sky. I dressed warmly because it was
rather cool and set out walking in the dark. I was going in a certain
direction without being conscious of it, and suddenly felt the need to
go to a spot that François had shown me during the summer - a
145

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

deserted place between two brooks and surrounded by forest. It was
called the Roc Plat. I reached it around midnight, half wondering
what I was doing there, but following my intuition since I had been
told that I could be guided telepathically.
The sky was magnificent, and stars were shining everywhere, for
there was not a single cloud to be seen. As I stood watching the
shooting stars, the whole countryside suddenly lit up, and I saw a
huge ball of fire, like a spark, appear behind some bushes. I moved
towards the place where the ball of fire had appeared, filled with a
tremendous joy, as I was almost certain of what I was going to find.
The same craft that I had seen on six occasions in the month of
December 1973 was there in front of me, and the same person I had
met two years earlier came towards me with a smile full of kindness.
I noticed one difference right away. He no longer had on the
spacesuit that had seemed to make a halo around his face the first
time. After all the time I had spent trying to make the world
understand that I was indeed telling the truth, I was wonderfully
happy to see once more the person who had been responsible for
turning my life upside down. I bowed before him, and he spoke.
‘Stand up and follow me,’ he said. ‘We are very satisfied with you
and with everything you have done for the past two years. It is now
time to pass on to the next stage, since you have proven to us that we
can trust you.
These two years were in fact just a trial. You can see that today I
have no protection around my face, and that my craft appeared to
you all at once and was not equipped with flashing lights. All of that
was only intended to reassure you, so that I would appear in a way
that corresponds to the image that you generally have of space
travelers. But now that you are sufficiently evolved not to take fright,
we won’t use such approach techniques any more.’
Following him inside the craft, I noticed that its interior looked
very similar to what I had found at our first meeting - walls with the
same metallic appearance as the outside, no control board or
instruments, no portholes, and a floor made of a translucent blue
substance on which stood two armchairs. These were made of a
146

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE M ESSAGE : PART T WO

transparent material that reminded me a little of inflatable plastic
chairs, but without feeling unpleasant.

Site of Rael’s second encounter: Le Roc Plat, near Brantome,
Perigord region, October 7th, 1975

He invited me to sit down in one of the two chairs, settled into the
other, and asked me not to move. He then pronounced a few words
in an incomprehensible language, and I seemed to feel the machine
rock slightly. Then all of a sudden, I felt a sensation of severe cold, as
147

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

if my whole body were turning into a block of ice, or rather as if
thousands of ice crystals were penetrating all the pores of my skin,
right down to the marrow of my bones. It lasted a very short time, a
few seconds perhaps, and I felt nothing after that.
Then my companion rose and said: ‘You may come, we have
arrived.’
I followed him down the small stairway. The craft stood motionless
in a metallic-looking circular room about fifteen meters in diameter
and ten meters high. A door opened, and my guide told me to go in
and undress completely. After that, I would receive further
instructions. I went into a new circular room that did not have the
slightest angle and must have been about four meters in diameter. I
undressed, and a voice told me to go into the room that was in front
of me.
At that moment a door opened, and I went into a room similar to
the one where I had left my clothes, but it was long and a little like a
corridor. Along the length of that corridor I passed under lights of
different colors in turn. The voice then told me that by following the
arrows painted on the floor, I would arrive in yet another room where
a bath awaited me.
In this next room I did indeed find a sunken bathtub. The water
was lukewarm, just right, and discreetly perfumed. The voice advised
me to satisfy my personal needs, which I did, and then it asked me to
drink the contents of a glass located on a small shelf by the metallic
wall. It was a white liquid deliciously savored with almonds, and very
cold. Then some soft, pajama-like clothes that felt like silk were
offered to me. They were white, very close fitting, and had been laid
out ready for me on another shelf. At last a final door opened, and I
found my guide again. He was escorted by two people who were of
similar appearance to him but with different features, and they were
every bit as welcoming.
I rejoined them in a huge hall where I found wonder after wonder.
It was arranged on several levels and must have measured 100 meters
in diameter. It was covered by an absolutely transparent dome, so
transparent that at first sight it was not clear even that it was a dome.
148

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE M ESSAGE : PART T WO

Thousands of stars studded the dark sky, and yet the entire hall was
brightly lit with a soft, natural looking light, as if it were midday. The
floor was covered with furs and shaggy carpets of astounding,
enchanting colors. The most admirable works of art were everywhere,
each one more beautiful than the last, and some had animated and
changing colors. Elsewhere there were plants - some bright red and
others blue, as beautiful as exotic fish but several meters tall.
Background music was playing that sounded like an organ and a
musical saw, with occasional choirs and bass voices producing
extraordinary vibrations.
This music made the flowers bend and sway in rhythm, and they
changed colors with each change of musical style.
Every time someone spoke, the music grew softer so that we could
hear each other without difficulty and without having to raise our
voices. The air was perfumed with a thousand scents that also
changed with the music and our positions in the room. The whole
area had been designed with about ten angled corners, which were
separated at different levels and each corner had a particular
character. A small stream meandered through all this.
My guide’s two companions were showing him great respect, and
the next thing he said to me was: ‘Follow me. We shall make ourselves
comfortable, since I have many things to tell you.’
I followed him to a group of armchairs and sofas made of a very
soft black fur, where all four of us sat down. There my guide spoke
again:
‘Today I am going to give you a second message that will complete
the one that I dictated to you in December 1973. You don’t have
anything to take notes with, but don’t worry, everything that I say to
you will remain engraved in your mind, because here we have a
technique that allows you to remember everything you hear.
First of all, we wish to congratulate you for all that you have done
over the past two years, but we also wish to warn you that the rest of
your mission may be more difficult. But never be discouraged in any
case, because you will be rewarded for your efforts, whatever happens
now.
149

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

To begin with, we must correct a passage in the first message we
gave you that you wrongly transcribed concerning an eventual
intervention on our part to destroy humanity. It must be made clear
that we will not intervene. Humanity is now arriving at a turning
point in its history, and its future depends only on itself. If you can
control your aggressiveness towards each other and your
environment, then you will reach a golden age of interplanetary
civilization, in which universal happiness and fulfillment will be
realized. If, on the other hand, your civilization gives way to violence,
then it will destroy itself, either directly or indirectly through all this.
No scientific or technical problem is insurmountable for human
genius, as long as human genius is in control. But someone with a
deficient brain can threaten worldwide peace, just as a person of
genius can bring the world happiness.
The sooner you set up geniocracy, the sooner you will remove the
possibility of a cataclysm caused by people with minds that are not
very evolved. In the event of a cataclysm destroying humanity, only
the people who follow you will be saved, and they will have to
repopulate the devastated Earth when all the danger has been
dispersed, as happened in Noah’s time.’

Buddhism
My guide continued:
‘Buddhism explains that at the time of death, the soul of the dead
person must be vigilant enough to escape numerous devils, otherwise
it will be reincarnated and fall back into the cycle. On the other hand,
if it manages to escape those infamous devils, it will be liberated from
the cycle and attain a state of bliss through awakening.
In fact, this is a very good description, which applies not to the
individual but to humanity as a whole. It must resist those devils,
which can make it fall back into the cycle each time it is in a position
150

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - B UDDHISM

to choose. Those “devils” are aggressiveness directed against our
fellow human beings or against nature, and the “state of bliss through
awakening” is a golden age of civilization in which science serves the
people, thus producing an earthly paradise, where the blind can see
and the deaf can hear by scientific means.
If humanity is not sufficiently wary of these devils, it will fall back
into the cycle of reincarnation, where it must start all over again from
a primitive state and advance progressively towards a more evolved
society in a hostile world, with all the suffering which that entails.
That is why we can find the swastika in our symbol, as in
numerous ancient writings, which signifies “the cycle”. It is the choice
between paradise, which the peaceful use of science makes possible,
and the hell of returning to the primitive stage where humanity
submits to nature instead of dominating and benefiting from it.
In a way, this is natural selection at the cosmic level for species that
are capable of leaving their planet. Only those who perfectly control
their aggressiveness can reach this stage. The others self-destruct as
soon as their scientific and technological levels permit them to invent
weapons powerful enough to do so. That is why we never fear those
who come from elsewhere to contact us. Thousands of contacts have
confirmed this absolute rule in the universe - people capable of
escaping their planetary system are always peaceful.
When a species is capable of leaving its own solar system, it means
that it has overcome the “progress-destruction cycle” that can occur
when mastery of its own aggressive tendencies is lacking. At the same
time that you discover powerful energy sources allowing you to travel
beyond your own solar system, you also become capable of creating
offensive weapons of irreversible destructive power.
Your region of the terrestrial globe, France, is already on the right
track in its attempt to unite Europe, and it should be the first country
without an army. France would thus set an example for the entire
world. Its military professionals would then lay the foundation for a
peacekeeping European army, eventually transforming it into a world
peace corps. Instead of being the guardians of war, the military would
151

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

then be the guardians of peace, a title deserving infinitely more
respect.
It is necessary for an important country to show the way for others
to follow, and France’s neighboring countries will not invade her just
because she has abolished compulsory military service and is using
her professional army in the service of the Europe that she is trying
to construct.
On the contrary, this would very quickly cause other countries to
follow suit and pursue the same path taken by your country. Once
Europe is united militarily, creating a single European currency can
unite its economy.
Then the same process could be applied throughout the world,
adding as we have already told you in the first message, a single world
language that would become compulsory in every school on Earth. If
one country must show the way, then France is that country. It is by
advocating a “deterrent force” that we accumulate the arms of our
own destruction.
With each country wishing to deter some other country, and in
practice never quite knowing which one, an unfortunate action could
then threaten to transform that “deterrent force” into a force of
intervention, which could be fatal to the whole world.
It is through the past that humanity views the future. This is a
mistake. We should instead be critical of the past and build the
present for the future, rather than build the present on the basis of
the past. You must understand that barely thirty years ago, people of
countries that are now advanced were still primitive. You are only just
emerging. There are millions of people on Earth who are still
primitive and incapable of seeing something in the sky as anything
other than a “divine” manifestation. Moreover, you know that deistic
religions are still very strong in all the economically less-developed
countries.
You must not revere people for their age, but for their intelligence,
while seeing to it that old people have a pleasant life. Our distant
ancestors should not be respected, and furthermore they should be
seen as an example of poor, limited, primitive people who were
152

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - B UDDHISM

unable to open themselves to the universe, and who were capable of
handing down only very few things of value from one generation to
the next.’

Neither God nor Soul
My guide went on to say:
‘The more primitive a society is, the more deistic religions will
flourish within it. This fact is actually cultivated by visitors from
other planets, who have no other way of peacefully visiting worlds
that have not yet overcome their aggressiveness.
If you reach the stage where you become evolved visitors on
primitive worlds, you will be forced to use such a system, which is in
fact very amusing and involves passing yourselves off as gods in their
eyes. In fact, this is extremely easy since, for primitive people, if you
come from the sky, you can only be divine. Of course, you must lay
it on a bit thick to be respected and pleasantly received, which does
no harm. We continue to make appearances on Earth to see if this
still works and to see the reactions of public authorities, governments,
and the press. We often amuse ourselves quite a lot...
As we have already explained to you in the first part of this
message, there is no God, and obviously, no soul. After death there is
nothing, unless science is used to create something. As you know, it
is possible to recreate a dead organism from one of the organism’s
cells, which contains its physical and intellectual blueprint. We have
noted that an organism loses a few grams at the moment of its death
- in fact this is merely the energy that all living things have available
to them, which is eliminated at that moment. As you know, energy,
like matter, has weight.
You also know that we have discovered that there is organized,
intelligent life on the level of the infinitely small, quite certainly as

153

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

evolved as we are and comparable to what we are ourselves. We have
been able to prove this.
From there, we have discovered that the stars and planets are the
atoms of a gigantic being, which itself certainly contemplates other
stars with curiosity. It is also highly likely that the people living on the
infinitely small levels of the infinitely large person and his fellow
creatures have known periods when they believed in an immaterial
“God”.
You must fully understand that everything is in everything. At this
moment in an atom of your arm, millions of worlds are being born
and others are dying, believing or not believing in a “God” and a soul,
and when a millennium has gone by for you, the gigantic being of
whom the sun is an atom has only had the time to take one step.
Time is, in fact, inversely proportional to the mass, or rather to the
level of the form of life. But everything in the universe is alive and in
harmony with the infinitely large and the infinitely small.
The Earth is alive like all the planets, and for the small growth that
is humanity, it is difficult to notice this because of the time lag due to
the enormous difference in mass, which prevents you from perceiving
its palpitations. Nor could one of our red blood cells, or better still,
one of the atoms that make up our body imagine that it forms, with
its peers, a living being.
Finally, whatever happens to each individual, the universal balance
remains constant. But if we want to be happy at our level, we must
live in harmony with the infinitely large, the infinitely small, and
with our fellow human beings.
No argument aiming to support the existence of any type of god or
soul can be sustained when we glimpse, however briefly, at the
infinite nature of the universe. No heaven could exist in any
particular place because, since the universe is infinite, it cannot have
a center. Besides, as I have already explained, there cannot be any
communication between an infinitely large entity and a universe of
infinitely small entities, because the difference in mass is too great,
thus creating a difference in the flow of equivalent time.
154

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - N EITHER G OD N OR S OUL

Finally, if one can imagine an immortal soul escaping from the
body after death - an image that is very poetic but rather naive since
it comes from the minds of primitives - one cannot imagine where it
would go, given that the universe is infinite.
The quantity of energy that flies off at the time of death disperses
in a random way, losing all identity as it blends with all the energies
suspended in the surrounding air. That identity is obviously engraved
only in organized matter, such as the cells of a living being that has
just died. This matter is organized according to the blueprint, which
the genes of the male and the female determined at conception while
creating the first cell.
With regard to the origin of life on Earth, some people might say:
“Your explanation doesn’t change a thing, since you cannot say what
there was at the very beginning.”
This is a foolish comment, which proves that the person who
makes it has no awareness of infinity, which exists in time as well as
in space. There is neither a beginning nor an end to matter, since
“nothing is lost, nothing is created, everything is transformed,” as you
have already heard it said. Only the form of matter can change
according to the wishes of those who have reached a scientific level,
which allows them to accomplish this.
It is the same for the infinite levels of life. That is what the second
part of our emblem represents. The Star of David, which is composed
of two intertwined triangles, means “as above, so below.” With the
swastika, which signifies that everything is cyclic, in the middle of a
six-pointed star, you have our emblem, which contains all the
wisdom in the world. You can also find the two symbols together in
ancient writings like the Bardo Thodol or Tibetan Book of the Dead,
and in many other writings as well.
It is evidently very difficult for a finite human brain to be
conscious of infinity, which explains the need to limit the universe in
time and space by belief in one or several gods that are made
responsible for everything.
Indeed, those who cannot reach a sufficient level of human
understanding towards the universe have trouble accepting the
155

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

notion of infinity, which makes humanity nothing exceptional, but
merely people situated at a particular time and place in the infinite
universe.
People obviously prefer things to be well defined, well framed,
limited in a way, in the image of their own minds. Those who ask
themselves if it is possible that there is life on other planets are the
best example of those limited minds, and we liked very much the
comparison you made during one of your lectures, likening such
people to frogs at the bottom of their own pond wondering whether
there was life in other ponds.’

Paradise on Earth
‘You could very soon live in a genuine terrestrial paradise if only the
technology that you have at your disposal today were made to serve
human well-being, instead of serving violence, armies, or the personal
profit of a few.
Science and technology can totally liberate humanity, not only
from the problem of hunger in the world, but also from the
obligation to work to live, since machines can quite easily look after
the daily chores by themselves, thanks to automation.
Already, in some of your most modern factories, where it used to
take several hundred people to build one car, now only a single
individual is needed to oversee a computer that commands and
carries out all the car building operations. In the future, even that one
person will be unnecessary. Workers’ unions are not happy about this
because factories are in less and less need of personnel and are letting
more and more workers go. This is not normal - these fantastic
machines which do the work of 500 people should enable those 500
to really live, rather than enrich only one person, their boss.
No individual should be in the service of another, nor work for
anyone for a salary. Machines can easily do all the chores and take
156

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - PARADISE O N E ARTH

care of all the work, enabling people to dedicate themselves to the one
thing for which they were created - to think, create and blossom.
That is what happens on our planet. Your children must no longer be
raised according to the three primitive precepts of work, family, and
country. On the contrary, they should be brought up following the
principles of fulfillment, freedom, and universal fraternity.
“Work” is not sacred when it is motivated only by the need to earn
just enough to live a laborious life of hardship. It is even terribly
degrading to sell oneself, and one’s life, in order to eat, by doing jobs
that simple machines could do.
The “family” has never been anything but a way for ancient as well
as modern supporters of slavery to force people to work harder for an
illusory family ideal.
Finally, “patriotism” is still only a supplementary means of creating
competition between people and urging them to perform their
sacrosanct work with greater ardor each day.
What is more, those three concepts - work, family, and country have always been supported by primitive religions. But now, you are
no longer primitive people. Shake off all those dusty old principles
and make the most of your life on Earth, which science can transform
into paradise.
Do not be taken in by those who speak to you of potential enemies
and allow armament factories to compel underpaid workers to
produce destructive weapons that bring profits to big industrialists.
Do not be taken in by those who speak to you in horror of the falling
birthrate, because young people understand that they need not have
so many children, and that it is better to have fewer so they can be
happier, as they won’t be too numerous on Earth.
Do not be taken in by those who constantly brandish remarks
under your nose, saying things like “neighboring peoples are
multiplying and could become a threat.” They are the same people
who support the stockpiling of nuclear weapons under the pretext of
“deterrence”.

157

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Finally, do not let yourself be taken in by those who tell you that
military service enables you to learn how to use a gun and that “it can
always be useful”, while they continue to pile up nuclear missiles.
They want to teach you violence, to teach you not to be afraid of
killing a person like yourself, using the excuse that he is wearing a
different uniform, and training you until it becomes a mechanical
reflex after repeated practice against training targets.
Do not be taken in by those who tell you that you must fight for
your country. No country deserves it. Do not be influenced by those
who say to you: “What if enemies invade our country, shouldn’t we
defend ourselves?” Answer that non-violence is always more efficient
than violence.
It is not proven that those who died for France were right, no
matter how hostile their aggressors were. Look at the triumph of
Gandhi in India.
Such people will tell you that you must fight for your liberty, but
they forget that the Gauls lost their war against the Romans, and that
the French are no worse off for being descendants of the conquered,
having benefited from the civilization of the conquerors. Live rather
in fulfillment, freedom and love, instead of listening to all those
narrow-minded, aggressive people.
The most important aid you have to help you reach a long and
lasting universal peace is television, the source of a genuine planetary
awareness that makes it possible to see what goes on every day all over
the globe and realize that the “barbarians” who live on the other side
of the border have all the same joys, the same sorrows and the same
problems as yourselves. It also records the progress of science, the
latest artistic creations, and so on.
Of course, it is important to ensure that this wonderful tool of
diffusion and communication does not fall into the hands of people
who would use it to condition masses of people by providing biased
information.
But you really can consider television to be the nervous system of
humanity, which enables each individual to be aware of the existence
of others and to see how they live. It also prevents the spread of
158

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - PARADISE O N E ARTH

distorted ideas about others that create a fear of strangers. Long ago
there was fear of the neighboring tribe, then fear of the neighboring
village, of the neighboring province, and of the neighboring state.
There is currently a fear of the neighboring race, and if this no
longer existed, there would be fear of potential aggressors coming
from another planet.
It is necessary to reverse this attitude and be open to everything
that comes from the outside, because all fear of strangers is proof of
a primitive level of civilization. In this sense, television is irreplaceable
and is possibly the most important development of any civilization
because, in the same way as radio, it enables all those isolated cells of
humanity, which people are, to be informed at all times of what the
others are doing. As already indicated, it works exactly as the nervous
system does in the body of a living being.’

The Other World
‘You are probably wondering where you are,’ my guide said. ‘In fact,
you are now on a base located relatively close to the Earth. In the first
message, you noted that we traveled seven times faster than the speed
of light. That was true 25,000 years ago when we landed on Earth.
Since then, we have made much progress, and we now travel through
space much faster. It only takes us a few moments to make the
journey that used to take us almost two months in those times, and
we continue to progress. If you will now follow me, we will take a
little trip together.’
I rose and followed my three guides. We went through an airlock,
and in a vast room I noticed a craft similar to the one that had
brought me from Earth, but it was far larger. The exterior must have
been about twelve meters in diameter, and inside it had four seats
facing each other instead of just two. We sat down as before, and
again I felt the same sensation of intense cold, but it lasted much
159

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

longer this time - about ten minutes. Then the craft rocked slightly,
and we stepped out through the trap door exit.
Before me a paradisiacal landscape unfolded, and in fact I cannot
find any words to describe my enchantment at seeing huge flowers,
each more beautiful than the last, and animals of unimaginable
appearance were walking among them. There were birds with
multicolored plumage, and pink and blue squirrels with the heads of
bear cubs climbing in the branches of trees that bore both enormous
fruits and gigantic flowers.
About thirty meters from the spacecraft, a small group of Elohim
was waiting for us, and behind the trees I was able to make out a
group of buildings that resembled brightly colored shells
harmonizing perfectly with the vegetation. The temperature was very
mild, and the air was perfumed with countless scents of exotic
flowers. We walked towards the top of a hill, and a marvelous
panorama began to appear. Innumerable small streams wound through
the lush vegetation, and far off an azure sea sparkled in the sun.
Reaching a clearing, I discovered with great astonishment a group
of people similar to me, by which I mean people resembling those
who live on Earth, not Elohim. Most of them were naked or wore
robes made of multicolored silks. They bowed respectfully before my
three guides, and then we all sat down.
Our armchairs seemed to have been carved in the rock and were
covered with thick furs that always remained fresh and comfortable
despite the warmth. Some people came out of a small cave located
right next to us and approached us carrying trays piled high with
fruits, grilled meats accompanied by the most incredible sauces, and
drinks of unforgettable flavors.
Behind each guest two of the men who carried the trays were
kneeling ready to satisfy the slightest wish of those who were eating.
The latter would ask them for whatever they desired without even
looking at them.
During the meal some marvelous music had started up, from
where I could not tell, and young naked women with figures as
160

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE OTHER W ORLD

sculptural as those of the waiters started to dance with incomparable
grace on the surrounding lawn.
There must have been some forty guests who were similar to
people from Earth in addition to my three guides. There were white,
yellow and black men and women who all spoke a language I could
not understand that resembled Hebrew.
I was sitting to the right of the Eloha whom I had met two years
earlier, and to the left of the six other Elohim. Facing me sat a young
bearded man, very handsome and very slim. He wore a mysterious
smile and an expression filled with fraternal feeling. To his right was
a man with a noble face sporting a black beard that was very thick
and very long. To his left was a more corpulent man with an Asian
face. He had a shaven head.

Meeting the Ancient Prophets
Towards the end of the meal, my guide started to speak to me:
‘In my first message I told you of a residence located on our planet
where people from Earth can continue to live thanks to the scientific
secret of eternity that is based on a single cell.
Among those people are Jesus, Moses, Elijah and so on. This
residence is, in fact, very large, since it is an entire planet where the
members of the Council of the Eternals live as well. My name is
Yahweh, and I am the president of that Council of the Eternals.
There are currently 8,400 people from Earth living on the planet
where we are at this moment. They are people who during their lives
reached a sufficient level of open-mindedness towards the infinite, or
who enabled humanity on Earth to progress from its primitive level
through their discoveries, their writings, their ways of organizing
society and their exemplary acts of fraternity, love or selflessness.
Alongside them live the 700 Elohim members of the Council of the
Eternals.
161

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Whatever the outcome of your mission may be, you have your
place reserved here among us in this veritable little paradise where
everything is easy, thanks to science, and where we live happily and
eternally. I can truly say eternally, for, as on Earth, we created all life
here, and we are starting to understand perfectly the life of the
infinitely large, that is to say, of the planets, and we can detect signs
of old age in solar systems, which will enable us to leave this planet
in time to create another paradise elsewhere, as soon as we grow
anxious about its survival.
The eternals who live here, both people from Earth and Elohim,
can fulfill themselves as they wish, without having to do anything but
that which pleases them - scientific research, meditation, music,
painting, and so on.
Or they can do nothing at all if they feel like it.
The servants you saw carrying the dishes a little while ago, as well
as the dancers, are just biological robots. They are created according
to the same principle we used to create the people of Earth in a totally
scientific way, but they have been limited and are absolutely
submissive to us.
They are also incapable of acting without orders from us, and they
are very specialized. They have no aspirations of their own, and no
pleasure, except those that are necessary for their specialization. They
grow old and die like us, but the machine that makes them can make
far more than we need. They are incapable of feelings or suffering,
and cannot reproduce themselves.
Their life span is similar to ours - that is to say about 700 years
with the help of a small surgical intervention. When one of them
must be destroyed due to old age, the machine that created them
produces one or several others, depending on our needs. They come
out of the machine ready to function and with their normal height,
for they have neither growth nor childhood.
They only know how to do one thing: obey people from Earth and
Elohim, and they are incapable of the slightest violence.
They can all be recognized by the small blue stone that both males
and females wear between their eyes. They take care of the dirty jobs
162

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - M EETING

THE

A NCIENT P ROPHETS

and do all the work that is uninteresting. They are produced, taken
care of and destroyed underground where, in fact, all the
maintenance work is done by such robots and by enormous
computers that regulate all the problems of nourishment, supply of
raw materials, energy and other things. We each have on average ten
robots at our service, and as there are slightly more than 9,000 of us
- Earth people and Elohim - there is a permanent total of 90,000
male and female robots.
Like the Elohim members of the Council of the Eternals, the
eternals from Earth are not allowed to have children. They agree to
have a small operation, which makes them sterile, but that sterility
can easily be reversed. The purpose of this measure is to prevent
undeserving beings from joining us in this marvelous world.
However, male and female eternals can unite freely just as they wish,
and all jealousy is eliminated.
In addition, men who wish to have one or more companions
outside the relationships of equality that exist between eternal men
and women, or who do not want to live with a woman on an equal
basis, may have one or more totally submissive biological robot
women with the exact appearance that is desired. The same goes for
women, who can have one or several totally submissive biological
robot men.
The machine that generates the robots gives the entity that it
creates the exact physical appearance and specialization desired.
There are several types of ideal women and men in terms of shape and
physiognomy, but the height, measurements, shape of the face, and
so on, can be modified as one wishes. One can even submit the
picture of someone particularly admired or loved on Earth, for
example, and the machine will produce an exact replica. Thus the
relationships between eternals of both sexes are much more fraternal
and respectful, and the unions between them are marvelously pure
and high.
Because of the extraordinary level of open-mindedness of those
admitted here, there is never any problem between them. The
majority spends almost all of their time meditating, doing scientific
163

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

research, making inventions and artistic compositions, and creating
all sorts of things. We can live in different cities with multiple
architectural styles in greatly varied sites that we can modify at will.
People fulfill themselves as they wish, only doing what they like to do.
Some find pleasure in doing scientific experiments, others in
playing music, others in creating ever more amazing animals and
others in meditating or doing nothing other than making love while
enjoying the numerous pleasures of this heavenly environment,
drinking from the innumerable fountains and eating the juicy fruits
that grow all over the place at all times. Here there is no winter; we
all live in a region comparable to your equator, but as we can
scientifically control the climate, it is always fine weather and not too
hot. We make the rain fall during the night when and where we wish.
All this, and many other things, which you could not understand all
at once, makes this world a true paradise. Here, everyone is free and
can be so in total safety, for all deserve that liberty.
All things that bring pleasure are positive, as long as that pleasure
is not harmful to anyone in any way. This is why all sensual pleasures
are positive, for sensuality is always an opening up to the outside
world, and all such opening is good. On Earth you are only just
emerging from all those primitive taboos that tried to make anything
to do with sex or nudity appear evil, whereas nothing could possibly
be purer.
Nothing is more disappointing for your creators than to hear
people say that nudity is something bad: nudity, the image of what
we have made. As you can see, almost everyone is naked here; and
those dressed in clothes wear them either because they are works of
art given to them by other eternals who made them with their own
hands, or for elegance and decoration.
When people from Earth are admitted to this world of the eternals,
they start out by receiving some chemical education so that nothing
surprises them, and they have a good understanding of where they are
and why.’
My guide, Yahweh, paused for a moment, and then said: ‘You are
now sitting directly opposite the man who, 2,000 years ago, was
164

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - M EETING

THE

A NCIENT P ROPHETS

given the responsibility of creating a movement to spread more
widely the message we had left originally to the people of Israel - a
message which would enable you to be understood now. I am
referring to Jesus, whom we were able to recreate from a cell that we
had preserved before his crucifixion.’
The handsome, bearded young man seated opposite offered me a
smile full of fraternity.
‘To his right is Moses, on his left Elijah, and to the left of Jesus sits
the one remembered on Earth by the name of Buddha. A little further
on you can see Mohammed, in whose writings I am called Allah,
because out of respect they did not dare call me by name. The forty
men and women present at this meal are all representatives of the
religions created after our contacts on Earth.’
All those present looked at me with expressions that were very
friendly and amused, probably because they were remembering their
own surprise upon arriving in this world.
My guide continued: ‘Now I will show you some of our installations.’
He stood up, and I followed him. He invited me to put on a very wide
belt bearing a huge buckle. He and his two friends had buckled on the
same kind of adornment. Immediately I felt myself being lifted up from
the ground and carried at about twenty meters above the grass, almost
level with the tops of the trees, at a very great speed, maybe a hundred
kilometers per hour, maybe more, towards a precise location. My three
companions were with me, Yahweh in front and his two friends behind.
One curious thing, among others, was that I did not feel any wind at all
whipping against my face.
We landed in a small clearing, quite close to the entrance of a small
cave. We were in fact still being carried by our belts, but only at a height
of one meter above the ground, and moving more slowly. We passed
through galleries with metallic walls and arrived in a vast hall, in the
center of which was an enormous machine surrounded by about ten
robots recognizable by the ornaments on their foreheads. There, we
landed on the ground again and took off our belts.
Yahweh then spoke: ‘Here is the machine that makes biological
robots. We are going to create one of them for you.’
165

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

He made a sign to one of the robots located near the machine, and
the robot touched certain parts of it. Then he made a sign for me to
move close to a window measuring about two meters by one meter.
In a bluish liquid I then saw the form of a human skeleton vaguely
taking shape. Its form grew clearer and clearer, finally becoming a real
skeleton. Then some nerves took shape and formed over the bones,
then some muscles and finally some skin and hair. A splendid athlete
was now lying there in a position where moments earlier there had
been nothing.
Yahweh spoke again: ‘Remember in the Old Testament, this
description in Ezekiel, Chapter 37:
Son of man, can these bones live?…there was a noise, and behold
a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone. And
when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them,
and the skin covered them above...and the breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding
great army.

The description that you will give of this will certainly be similar
to Ezekiel’s - apart from the noise, which we have been able to
eliminate.’
Indeed, what I had seen corresponded perfectly to Ezekiel’s
description. Following this, the prostrate figure had slid to the left
and disappeared completely from my sight. Then a trap door opened,
and I saw the creature whose rapid creation I had witnessed, lying on
a very white fabric.
He was still immobile, but suddenly he opened his eyes, got up,
came down the few steps that separated him from our level, and after
exchanging a few words with another robot, came up to me. He gave
me his hand, which I shook, and I felt his skin soft and warm.
‘Do you have a picture of a loved one with you?’ Yahweh asked.
‘Yes,’ I answered, ‘I have a picture of my mother in my wallet,
which I left in my clothes.’
166

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - M EETING

THE

A NCIENT P ROPHETS

He showed it to me, asking if it was the right one. When I agreed
that it was, he gave it to one of the robots, who inserted it in the
machine and touched parts of it. Through the window I witnessed yet
another creation of a living being. Then, as the skin started to cover
the flesh, I realized what was happening: they were making an exact
replica of my mother from the picture I had provided. Indeed, a few
moments later, I was able to kiss my mother, or rather the image of
my mother as she had been ten years before, for the picture I had
provided had been taken about ten years previously.
Yahweh then said to me: ‘Now allow us to make a very small
puncture in your forehead.’
One of the robots came towards me, and with the help of a small
device similar to a syringe, pricked my forehead so lightly that I
hardly felt it.
Then he inserted the syringe in the enormous machine and
touched other parts of it. Again an entity was formed before my eyes.
As the skin covered the flesh, I saw another ‘me’ take shape, little by
little. Indeed, the being that emerged from the machine was an exact
replica of myself.
‘As you can see,’ Yahweh told me, ‘this other you is not wearing the
small stone on his forehead, which is characteristic of the robots and
that the replica of your mother also had.
From a photo we can only make a replica of the physical body, with
no psychological personality or almost none, whereas from a sample
cell like the one we took from between your eyes, we can create a total
replication of the individual whose cell we took, complete with the
memory, personality and character. We could now send the other you
back to Earth, and people would not notice a thing. But we are going
to destroy this replica immediately, for it is of no use to us.
At this moment there are two of you who are listening to me, and the
personalities of these two beings are beginning to be different, because
you know that you are going to live, and he knows that he is going to
be destroyed. But that does not bother him, since he knows he is
nothing but yourself. This is more proof, if proof is needed, of the non167

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

existence of the soul - or a purely spiritual entity unique to each body in which certain primitive people believe.’
After that we left the room that housed that enormous machine,
and through a corridor we entered another room containing other
equipment.
We approached another machine.
‘In this machine are kept the cells of malevolent people who will
be recreated to be judged when the time comes. They are cells from
those on Earth who preached violence, wickedness, aggressiveness
and obscurantism. Despite having in their possession all the elements
to understand where they came from, these people did not have the
sense to recognize the truth. They will be recreated to undergo the
punishment they deserve, after being judged by those whom they
made to suffer or by their ancestors or descendants.
You now fully deserve a rest. This robot will be your guide and will
provide you with anything you desire until tomorrow morning. We
will then have a few more words to say to you, and afterwards we will
accompany you back to Earth. Between now and then you will have
a foretaste of what awaits you when your mission is completed on
your planet.’
The next moment a robot approached and saluted me respectfully.
He was tall, athletic looking, dark, beardless and very handsome.

A Foretaste of Paradise
The robot asked me if I wanted to see my room, and after I agreed,
he handed me one of the belts used for travelling. I found myself
being transported above the ground again, and when I landed once
more, I found myself in front of a house that looked more like a
scallop shell than a residence. The interior was entirely carpeted with
shaggy furs, and there was a huge bed, at least as big as four Earth
beds, looking as if it had been sunk into the ground. It was
168

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - A F ORETASTE O F PARADISE

recognizable only by the different colored furs covering it. In one
corner of the huge room, there was a massive sunken bathtub as big
as a swimming pool, surrounded by vegetation of marvelous shapes
and colors.
‘Would you like some female companions?’ asked the robot.
‘Come, you can make your own choice.’
I put my belt on again and found myself transported back in front
of the machine used for making robots. A luminous cube appeared in
front of me.
I was shown to an armchair facing the cube and given a helmet.
When I had settled down, a magnificent young brunette with
marvelously harmonious proportions appeared three-dimensionally
within the luminous cube. She moved in such a way as to show
herself off, and had she not been in a cube floating one meter above
the ground, I would have thought she was real.
My robot asked me whether she pleased me and if I wished to have
her shape altered or her face modified. I told him that I considered
her perfect.
He replied that aesthetically speaking, she was the ideal woman, or
rather, one of the three types of ideal women, as defined by the
computer according to the taste of the majority of residents on the
planet. But I could ask for any modification that I desired.
At my refusal to change anything whatsoever about that
magnificent creature, a second woman, this time blonde and alluring,
appeared in the luminous cube. She was different but just as perfect
as the first one. With her I could not find anything to alter either.
Finally, a third young female, this one a redhead more sensual than
the first two, appeared in the strange cube. The robot asked me if I
cared to see other models, or if these three ideal types of my race
would be enough for me. I answered quite naturally that I thought
these three people were extraordinary.
At that moment, a magnificent black woman appeared in the cube,
then a very fine slender Chinese female, and then finally another
voluptuous young Asian woman.
169

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The robot asked me which person I desired to have as a
companion. Since I answered that they all pleased me, he went
towards the robot making machine and spoke for a moment with one
of his peers. Then the machine was set in motion, and I understood
what was about to happen.
A few minutes later I was back at my residence with my six
companions. There I had the most unforgettable bath that I have ever
had, in the company of those charming robots, totally submissive to
all my desires.
Afterwards my robot guide asked if I wished to make some music.
When I said ‘yes’, he took out a helmet similar to the one I had put
on before the projection of the female robot models.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘imagine some music that you would like to hear.’
Immediately a sound was heard, corresponding exactly to music
that I had been thinking about, and as I constructed a melody in my
head, that same melody became a reality with sounds of an amplitude
and a sensitivity that were more extraordinary than any I had ever
heard. The dream of every composer had become a reality - the ability
to compose music directly without having to go through the laborious
process of writing and orchestrating.
Then my six adorable companions began dancing to my music in
a most voluptuous and bewitching way.
After a while, my robot asked me if I would also care to compose
some images. Another helmet was given to me, and I sat in front of a
semi-circular screen. I set myself to imagining certain scenes, and
these scenes at once became visible on the screen. I was seeing, in fact,
an immediate visualization of all the thoughts that came to me. I
started thinking about my grandmother, and she appeared on the
screen. I thought of a bouquet of flowers, and it appeared; and when
I imagined a rose with green spots, it appeared as well. This machine
actually made it possible to visualize one’s thoughts instantaneously,
without having to explain them. What a marvel!
‘With training one can create a story and have it played out,’ my robot
told me. ‘Many performances of this kind, performances of direct creation,
are held here.’
170

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - A F ORETASTE O F PARADISE

Finally, after a while, I went to bed and spent the most extravagant
night of my life with my marvelous female companions.
The next day, I got up, took another perfumed bath, and then a
robot served us a delicious breakfast. Then he asked me to follow
him, for Yahweh was expecting me. I put on the transportation belt
again, and soon found myself in front of a strange machine, where
the president of the Council of the Eternals was waiting for me.
It was not as large as the one that created robots but was still very
big. A sizable armchair was embedded in its center.
Yahweh asked me if I had spent a pleasant night, and then
explained to me: ‘This machine will awaken certain faculties that lie
dormant within you. Your brain will then be able to exploit its full
potential. Sit down here.’
I sat down in the chair that he indicated, and a sort of shell covered
my skull. I thought I was losing consciousness for a moment, and
then it felt as if my head were about to explode.
I saw multicolored flashes pass before my eyes. Finally, everything
stopped, and a robot helped me out of the armchair. I felt terribly
different.
I had the impression that everything was simple and easy.
Yahweh spoke again: ‘From now on, we will see through your eyes,
hear through your ears, and speak through your mouth. We will even
be able to heal through your hands, as we already do at Lourdes and
in many other places in the world, for some sick people who deserve
our help because of their will to radiate the message we have given
you, and because of their efforts to acquire a cosmic mind by opening
themselves to infinity.
We observe everyone. Huge computers ensure a constant
surveillance of all people living on Earth. A mark is attributed to
everyone depending on whether their actions during their life led
towards love and truth or towards hate and obscurantism.
When the time comes to evaluate, those who went in the right
direction will have the right to eternity on this heavenly planet, those
who achieved nothing positive yet were not evil will not be recreated,
and for those whose actions were particularly negative, a cell from
171

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

their body will have been preserved, which will allow us to recreate
them when the time comes, so that they can be judged and suffer the
punishment they deserve.
You who are reading this message, understand clearly that you can
have access to this marvelous world, this paradise. You will be welcomed,
you who follow our messenger, Claude Rael, our ambassador on the path
to universal love and cosmic harmony, you who will help him realize
what we will ask of him - for we see through his eyes, hear through his
ears, and speak through his mouth.
Your idea of creating a congregation of guides for humanity is very
good. But be strict with regard to their selection, so that our message
will never be deformed or betrayed.
Meditation is indispensable for opening one’s mind, but asceticism
is useless. You must enjoy life with all the strength of your senses, for
the awakening of the senses goes together with the awakening of the
mind.
Continue to play sports if you wish and if you have the time, for
all sports and games are good whether they develop musculature, or
better still, self-control as do motor racing and motorbike racing.
A person who feels alone can always try to communicate
telepathically with us, while trying to be in harmony with the
infinite; he or she will feel an immense sense of well being. What you
have advised concerning a gathering of people who believe in us in
each region on Sunday mornings at about eleven o’clock is very good.
Few members are presently doing this.
Mediums are useful, so seek them out. But balance them because
their gifts as mediums - which are only gifts of telepathy - unbalance
them, and they begin to believe in magic, the supernatural, and other
incredibly stupid things, including an ethereal body, which is a new
way of trying to believe in the soul which does not exist. In fact, what
they are actually doing is tuning into people who lived several
centuries ago, and whom we have recreated on this paradisiacal
planet.
There is an important revelation, which you may now make. The
Jews are our direct descendants on Earth. That is why a specific
172

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - A F ORETASTE O F PARADISE

destiny is reserved for them. They are the descendants of “the sons of
Elohim and the daughters of men”, as mentioned in Genesis.
Their original mistake was to have mated with their scientific
creations. That is why they have suffered for such a long time.
But for them the time of forgiveness has come, and they will now
be able to live peacefully in their recovered country, unless they make
another mistake in not recognizing you as our messenger. We wish
our embassy on Earth to be built in Israel on a tract of land given to
you by the government. If they refuse, you may build it elsewhere,
and Israel will undergo a new punishment for not having recognized
our messenger.
You must devote yourself entirely to your mission. Do not worry,
you will be able to support your family. People who believe in you
and therefore in us must help you. You are our messenger, our
ambassador, our prophet, and in any case you have your place
reserved here among all the other prophets.
You are the one who must gather together people of all religions.
For the movement you have created, the Raelian Movement, must be
the religion of religions. I insist that it is indeed a religion, although
an atheistic religion, as you have already understood.
Those who help you we shall not forget, and those who cause you
trouble we shall not forget either. Do not be afraid and fear no one,
for whatever happens you have your place among us. As for those
who lose confidence, shake them up a little.
Two thousand years ago, those who believed in our messenger,
Jesus, were thrown into a lion’s den. Today, what do you risk? The
irony of fools? The sneers of those who haven’t understood anything
and prefer to keep to their primitive beliefs? What is all that
compared to a lion’s den? What is all that compared with what awaits
those who follow you? Truly it is easier than ever to follow one’s
intuition.
In the Koran, Mohammed, who is among us, has already said on
the subject of prophets:

173

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The moment for men to give account is drawing near; and yet in
their nonchalance they are turning away (from their creator).
No new warning comes from their creator whom they ignore and
laugh at. And their hearts are amused by it.
Those who do evil comfort themselves secretly by saying:
Is not this man only a mortal as we are?
It is a jumble of dreams. He made it all up himself. He is a poet.
But let him bring a miracle like those who were sent in time past.
Koran, Sura 21: 1-5.

Already Mohammed had to suffer the sarcasm of some, and Jesus
had to suffer it as well. When he was on the cross, some said:
If thou be the Son of Elohim, come down from the cross..
Matthew 27: 40.

And yet, as you have seen, Jesus is in marvelous shape and will be
for all eternity, as is Mohammed and all those who followed them and
believed in them. On the other hand, those who criticized them will
be recreated in order to receive their punishment.
The computers that monitor those people who have no knowledge
of this message are linked to a system that, at the time of death and
from a distance, automatically samples a cell from which they may be
recreated if they deserve it.
While waiting to build our embassy, create a seminary for the
Guides of the Raelian Movement near the area where you reside. It is
there that you who are our prophet, the Guide of Guides, will be able
to train those responsible for spreading our message all over the
Earth.’

174

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - T HE N EW C OMMANDMENTS

The New Commandments
Yahweh then said:
‘Those who wish to follow you will apply the laws I am now about
to give you:
You will appear at least once in your lifetime before the Guide of
Guides so that he may transmit your cellular plan through
manual contact, or have it transmitted by an initiated Guide, to
the computer that will take this into account at your life’s
assessment hour of judgment.
You will think at least once a day of the Elohim, your Creators.
You will try to radiate the message of the Elohim around you by
every possible means.
You will, at least once a year, give a donation to the Guide of
Guides that is equal to at least one percent of your annual income,
in order to help him devote himself full time to his mission and
travel around the world to spread this message.
You will, at least once a year, invite the Guide of your region into
your home, and you will gather at your place people who are
interested in hearing him explain the message in all its
dimensions.

If the Guide of Guides should disappear, the new Guide of Guides
will be the one who has been designated by the former Guide of
Guides. The Guide of Guides will be the guardian of the embassy of
the Elohim on Earth and will be able to live there with his family and
with the people of his choice.

175

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

You, Claude Rael, you are our ambassador on Earth, and the
people who believe in you must provide you with the means to
accomplish your mission.
You are the last of the prophets before the Judgement; you are the
prophet of the religion of religions, the demystifier and the shepherd
of shepherds. You are the one whose coming was announced in all the
religions by the ancient prophets, our representatives.
You are the one who will bring back the shepherds’ flock before the
water is spilled, the one who will bring back to their creators those
they have created. Those who have ears may hear, those who have
eyes may see. All those who have their eyes open will see that you are
the first prophet who can be understood only by scientifically evolved
beings. All that you speak of is incomprehensible to primitive
peoples.
This is a sign that will be noticed by those whose eyes are open the sign of the Revelation, the Apocalypse.’

To the People of Israel
‘The State of Israel must give some territory located near Jerusalem
to the Guide of Guides so that he may build there the residence, the
embassy of the Elohim. The time has come, people of Israel, to build
the New Jerusalem as it was foreseen. Claude Rael is the one who was
foretold. Reread your writings and open your eyes.
We wish to have our embassy among our descendants, and the
people of Israel are the descendants of the children born of the unions
between the sons of Elohim and the daughters of men.
People of Israel, we removed you from the clutches of the
Egyptians, and you did not show yourselves worthy of our
confidence; we entrusted you with a message destined for all
humanity, and you jealously kept it instead of spreading it abroad.

176

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - TO T HE P EOPLE O F I SRAEL

You have suffered for a long time to pay for your errors, but the
time of forgiveness has come, and as was foreseen, we have said: “To
the North give them up and to the South do not hold them back.” I
have gathered your sons and daughters “from the ends of the Earth,”
as was written in Isaiah, and you have been able to find your country
again. You will be able to live there in peace if you listen to the last of
the prophets, the one who was foretold to you, and if you help him
to accomplish what we ask of him.
This is your last chance, otherwise another country will welcome
the Guide of Guides and build our embassy on its territory, and that
country will be close to yours; it will be protected and happiness shall
prevail, and the State of Israel will be destroyed once more.
You, child of Israel who has not yet returned to your ancestral
lands, wait before returning there to see if the government will agree
to our embassy being built there. If they refuse, do not return, and
you will be one of those who will be saved from the destruction and
whose descendants will one day be able to find the promised land
again, when the time comes.
People of Israel, recognize the one foretold to you, give him the
territory to build our embassy, and help him build it. Otherwise, as
happened 2,000 years ago, it will be constructed elsewhere, and if it
is constructed elsewhere, you will be dispersed once again. If, 2,000
years ago, you had recognized that Jesus was indeed our messenger,
all the Christians in the world would not be Christians, but Jews. You
would not have had problems, and you would have remained our
ambassadors. But instead this task was given to other people who
took Rome for their base.
Two thousand years ago, you did not recognize our messenger, and
it was not Jerusalem but Rome that shone. Now you have a new
chance for it to be Jerusalem once more. If you do not seize it,
another country will shelter our embassy, and you will no longer have
any right to the land we had chosen for you.
There, I have finished. You will be able to annotate all this by
yourself once you have returned to Earth. Now enjoy this paradise a
177

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

while longer, and we will take you back for you to complete your
mission before returning to us for good.’
I remained there for several more hours, enjoying the many pleasures
of that world, meandering amongst numerous fountains and enjoying
the company of the great prophets whom I had met the day before
during meditation sessions. Then, after a last meal taken with the same
people as the day before, I found myself once again in the large vessel,
which set me down at the observation station. From there I retraced my
route of the day before, and found myself with my clothes in the small
craft, which dropped me off where it had picked me up, at Roc Plat. I
looked at my watch - it was midnight.
I returned home, where I immediately set to work to write down
all that I had been told. Everything was perfectly clear in my mind,
and I was surprised to find that I was writing it all at one stroke,
recalling without any hesitation the sentences I had heard. The words
remained as if engraved in my mind just as I had been told they
would at the beginning.
When I finished the account of what had happened, I began to feel
very clearly that something had been released inside me. This had
never happened before. I began writing again, all the while observing
closely what I was putting down as if I was simultaneously
discovering it as a reader. I was writing, but this time I did not feel
like the author of what was appearing on the paper. The Elohim were
starting to speak through my mouth, or rather, to write with my
hand.
What was being written before my eyes dealt with all areas that a
person is confronted with during his or her lifetime, and the right
way to react when faced with these problems. It was, in fact, a code
of life - a new way of behaving in the face of life’s events, of behaving
like a man, that is to say, as an evolved being, and therefore trying in
every way to open one’s mind to infinity and to place oneself in
harmony with it.
These great rules dictated by the Elohim, our creators, “Our
Fathers who are in Heaven”, as our ancestors used to say without
178

T HE S ECOND E NCOUNTER - TO T HE P EOPLE O F I SRAEL

really understanding, are all set forth here in the following pages in
their entirety.

179

3
THE KEYS

Introduction

F

or thousands of years those opposed to enlightenment and reform
have effectively imprisoned our minds in straitjackets. These
writings, however, are the keys we can use to set ourselves free.
The door that seals the human mind is fastened by many locks, all
of which must be opened at the same time if one wants to be able to
free it towards the infinite. If only one key is used, the other locks will
remain fastened, and if they are not all kept open at the same time,
then while the second lock is being freed, the first one will close
again, preventing the door from opening.
Human society is afraid of what it does not know, and so it is afraid
of what lies behind this door - even if it is happiness gained through
knowledge of the truth. Therefore, it applies pressure to prevent
people from even partly opening this door because society itself
prefers to remain in a state of misfortune and ignorance.
This is yet another obstacle found on the threshold of the doorway
through which the mind must pass to free itself. But, as Gandhi said:
‘It is not because no one sees the truth that it becomes an error.’ So if
you attempt to open this door, ignore the sarcasm of those who have
not seen anything - and of those who having seen, pretend not to see,
because of their fear of the unknown.
Also if opening the door seems too difficult for you, ask for help
from a Guide, since Guides have already opened the doors of their
180

T HE K EYS - I NTRODUCTION

own minds and know the difficulties involved. They will not be able
to open your door for you, but they will be able to explain the
different techniques that will enable you to succeed. Besides, they are
living witnesses of the happiness that can be achieved by opening the
door, and they prove wrong those who are afraid of what lies behind
the door.

Humanity
In every situation, we must always consider things in regard to four
levels:
- In relation to infinity;
- In relation to the Elohim, our parents and creators;
- In relation to human society;
- And finally, in relation to the individual.
The most important level is that relating to infinity, for it is in
relation to this level that all things must be judged - but always with
one constant factor: love. This means taking others into account, who
must be given love, because we must live in harmony with infinity,
and to do this we must live in harmony with others, because they are
a part of infinity as well.
Then we must take into account the advice given by our creators,
the Elohim, and act in such a way that human society listens to the
advice of those who created it.
Then we must take into account society, which makes it possible
for individuals to blossom on the path of truth. But although society
must be taken into account, it should not be followed; on the
contrary, society must be helped to emerge from its primitive
straitjacket by regular questioning of all its habits and traditions, even
if these are supported by laws that are only there to try and imprison
our minds in shackles of obscurantism.

181

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Finally, we must take into account the fulfillment of the individual.
Without this the mind does not reach its full potential, and it is
impossible to harmonize yourself with infinity and become a new man
if you are not fulfilled.

Birth
You must never impose any religion whatsoever on a child, who is still
but a larva, unable to understand what is happening to itself. So you
must neither baptize nor circumcise children, nor submit them to any
action that they have not themselves accepted. You must wait for
them to reach the age when they can understand and choose, and if
a religion appeals to them at that time, then leave them free to adhere
to it.
A birth should be a festive occasion, for the Elohim created us in
their image to be capable of reproducing ourselves. By creating a
living being, we preserve our own species and respect the work of our
creators.
A birth should also be an act of love, achieved in harmony as far as
sounds, colors and temperature are concerned, so that the human
being who is emerging into life develops the habit of being in
harmony.
You must immediately develop in children the habit of respecting
the liberty of others, and when they cry at night, go to them discreetly
but without their realizing that crying has brought them the comfort
of being tended. On the contrary, you must go to them and look after
them when they make no sound, and not go to them - at least not with
their being aware of it - when they cry. That way they will get used to
everything going better when they are in harmony with their
surrounding. “God helps those who help themselves”.

182

T HE K EYS - B IRTH

In fact, parents must understand that as soon as a child is born, it
is first of all an individual, and that no individual should be treated
like a child.
Even our creators do not treat us like children, but as individuals.
That is why they do not intervene directly to help us solve our
problems but allow us to overcome the obstacles that we encounter
by working things out for ourselves as responsible individuals.

Education
The little creature who is still just the larva of a human being must,
in its infancy, grow accustomed to respecting the liberty and the
tranquillity of others. Since little children are too young to
28
understand and reason, corporal punishment should be rigorously
applied by the person bringing them up, so that they suffer when they
cause suffering or disturb others by showing a lack of respect.
28
This corporal punishment should be applied only to very young
children, and then, in keeping with the child’s growing power to
reason and understand, it should be phased out progressively and
eventually stopped altogether. From the age of seven, corporal
28
punishment should be quite exceptional, and from the age of
fourteen, it should never be applied.
28
You will use corporal punishment only when punishing a child
for not respecting the freedom and tranquillity of others or yourself.
You will teach your child to blossom, and you will teach him or her
always to have a questioning attitude towards those things which
society and its schools want to inculcate. You will not force your child
to learn things that are not useful, and you will let him or her follow
any desired path because, do not forget, the most important thing is
his or her fulfillment.

183

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

You will teach your child always to judge things in the right order
with respect to infinity, with respect to our creators, with respect to
society, and with respect to itself.
You will not impose any religion on your child, but instead
impartially teach him or her the various beliefs that exist throughout
the world - or at least the most important ones in chronological
order: the Jewish religion, the Christian religion and the Muslim
religion. You will try to learn the major trends of thought of the
eastern religions, if you can, so that you are able to explain them to
your child. Finally, you will explain to him or her the main points of
the message given by the Elohim to the last of the prophets.
Above all, you will teach your child to love the world in which it
lives, and through this world, our creators.
You will teach him or her to open up to infinity and try to live in
harmony with infinity.
You will teach your child about the marvelous work accomplished
by the Elohim, our creators, and constantly seek ways for humanity
to become capable of repeating, some day, what our creators have
done - namely creating other humanities elsewhere by scientific
means.
You will teach your child to consider itself a part of the infinite that is, both immense and minute at the same time. “From dust were
ye made, and dust ye shall become.”
You will teach your child that the wrong done to others cannot be
repaired by any confession or absolution once it is done, and that it
must not be thought that when death is near, it is sufficient to begin
to believe in the Elohim or any god in order to have the right to
eternal life.
You will teach your child that we are judged by what we do
throughout our lives, that the path which leads to wisdom is long,
and that it certainly takes a whole lifetime to master it sufficiently. A
person who has not gone in the right direction throughout life will
not gain the right to scientific resurrection on the planet of the
eternals just by making a sudden late change to the right path - that
is, unless that person’s regret is truly genuine, and he or she acts with
184

T HE K EYS - E DUCATION

great sincerity, making up for lost time, striving to be forgiven by
those who were harmed, and devoting all his or her means to
bringing them love and happiness.
All this will still not be enough for the person who has made others
suffer, for even if he or she is forgiven by them and gives them love,
the errors will have been erased, but nothing positive will have been
accomplished.
This person will then have to set out anew, bring happiness to new
people whom he or she has never harmed and help those who spread
the truth, the guides.
But it is too late for someone who has regrets only at the moment
of death or shortly before. This person will not be forgiven.

Sensual Education
Sensual education is one of the most important things, and yet at the
moment, it scarcely exists at all.
You will awaken the mind of your child, but you will also awaken
his or her body, for the awakening of the body is linked to the
awakening of the mind. All those who seek to numb the body are also
numbing the mind.
Our creators have given us our senses so that we use them. The
nose is meant for smelling, the eyes for seeing, the ears for hearing,
the mouth for tasting, and the fingers for touching. We must develop
our senses so as to get more enjoyment from all the things around us,
which our creators put here for us to enjoy.
A sensual individual is far more likely to be in harmony with infinity,
because such a person can feel it without having to meditate or reflect.
Meditation and reflection will enable that individual to understand
this harmony better and to radiate it all around himself or herself by
teaching it.
185

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

To be sensual means to let your environment give you pleasure.
Sexual education is very important as well, but it only teaches the
technical functions and uses of the organs. Sensual education, on the
other hand, teaches us how to gain pleasure from our organs purely
for pleasure’s sake, without necessarily seeking to use them for their
utilitarian purposes.
To say nothing to your children about their sexual organs is wrong,
and although it is better to explain what they are for, this is still not
enough.
You must explain how they can gain pleasure from them.
To explain only their function would be like telling them that
music is for marching to, that knowing how to write is helpful only
for penning letters of complaint, or that movies are useful only for
giving audio visual courses, and other such nonsense. Fortunately,
thanks to artists and through the awakening of our senses, we can
obtain pleasure from listening, reading or looking at works of art that
were made for no other reason than to give pleasure. The same goes
for the sexual organs. They are not just for satisfying our natural
needs or for ensuring reproduction, but also for giving pleasure to
others and ourselves. Thanks to science, we have finally emerged
from the days when showing one’s body was a “sin”, and when sexual
intercourse brought its own punishment - the conception of a child.
Now thanks to contraceptive techniques, sexual union is freely
possible without it becoming a definitive commitment - or even a
possible one. You will teach your child all this without shame, but on
the contrary, with love, clearly explaining that he or she was made to
be happy and blossom fully - that is to say, to enjoy life with all the
senses and with their full force.
You must never be ashamed of your body or of your nakedness, for
nothing displeases our creators more than to see those they created
feeling ashamed of the appearance that has been given to them.
You will teach your children to love their bodies and every part of
the Elohim’s creation, because in loving their creation, we love them
as well.
186

T HE K EYS - S ENSUAL E DUCATION

Each one of our organs was created by our parents, the Elohim, so
that we might use it feeling not shame, but happiness at using
something for which it was designed. If the act of using one of our
organs brings pleasure, it means that our creators wish us to have that
pleasure.
Every individual is a garden that should not be left uncultivated. A
life without pleasure is an uncultivated garden. Pleasure is the
fertilizer that opens up the mind. Asceticism is useless unless it is a
temporary ordeal designed to train the mind to dominate the body.
But once we have succeeded in the ordeal that we have set ourselves
- which must always be limited in time - we should once more enjoy
the pleasures of life.
Asceticism can be accepted as the fallow period of that garden
which is an individual - that is to say, a momentary pause in the
search for pleasure, which enables us to appreciate it better later on.
You will accustom your children to having more and more freedom
by always treating them as individuals. You will respect their tastes
and inclinations, as you would like them to respect your own. Make
sure you realize that your child, male or female, is what it is, and that
you will not be able to make it what you want, just as it will not be
able to make you what it wants you to be. Respect your child so that
it respects you, and respect its tastes so that it respects yours.

Fulfillment
Self-fulfillment should be sought according to one’s tastes and
aspirations, without any preoccupation with what others think, as
long as no one else is being hurt.
If you feel like doing something, first see that it does no harm to
anyone, then do it without worrying about what others think of it. If
you feel like having a sensual or sexual experience with one or several
other individuals, whatever sex they may be, you may behave as you
187

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

desire, as long as they agree. Everything is permitted on the path to
fulfillment in order to awaken the body, and hence the mind.
We are at last emerging from those primitive times when women
were seen merely as instruments of reproduction belonging to society.
Thanks to science, women are now free to fulfill themselves sensually,
without having to fear the punishment of pregnancy. At last, woman
is truly the equal of man, since she may enjoy her body without living
in fear of having to endure alone the undesired consequences of her
acts.
Conceiving a child is something too important to be left to chance.
Therefore, do so only by choice after mature consideration in a
marvelous act of love, being fully aware of what you are doing, and
being certain that you truly wish it, because a child cannot become a
successful individual unless it is truly desired at the very moment of
conception.
The moment of conception is the most important because it is at
that time that the first cell, and therefore the plan of the individual,
is conceived.
This moment must therefore be desired, so that the first cell may
be created in perfect harmony, with the minds of the two parents
thinking strongly and consciously of the human being that they are
conceiving. This is one of the secrets of the new individual.
If you are looking only for the fulfillment of your body, and
therefore of your mind, use the means that science has put at your
disposal, starting with contraception. Only conceive a child when
you yourself are fulfilled, so that the life you conceive may be the fruit
of the union of two fulfilled individuals.
To reach fulfillment, use the means that science has provided to
enable you to awaken your body to pleasure without any risks.
Pleasure and procreation are two different things that must not be
confused. The first is for the individual, and the second is for the
species. It is only when the individual is fulfilled that he or she can
create a fulfilled human being.
If by accident you have conceived a child without desiring it, use
the means that science puts at your disposal - abortion. A child who
188

T HE K EYS - F ULFILLMENT

was not desired at the moment of conception cannot blossom fully,
since it was not created in harmony. Do not listen to those who try
to frighten you by talking about the physical - and especially moral consequences that an abortion can trigger. There are none if you are
treated by competent people. It’s rather by keeping an undesired
child, that you will be left with physical and moral disturbances that
can be passed on, and that will make the child you brought into the
world suffer too.
Having a child does not necessarily imply that you must be
married or even live with a man. Already, many women have decided
to have one or more children without marrying or living with a man.
The education of a child, who is an individual right from birth,
should not necessarily be provided by the parents. It would indeed
often be preferable for education to be entrusted to specialized people
who would contribute far more than some parents towards their
children’s fulfillment.
If you wish to have a child without living with a man, do as you
desire. Fulfill yourself, as you would like, without worrying what
others think.
If you choose to do this, do not think that you are condemned to
live alone forever. Welcome the men you like, and they will serve as
masculine role models for your child.
You can even decide one day to live with a man - this will not cause
any problems for your child at all. On the contrary, it will contribute
to his or her fulfillment. A change of environment is always positive
for a child.
Society should organize itself to take charge of the education of
children partially or totally, depending on the parents’ wishes. Those
parents who want to work should be able to leave their children in
the custody of competent people, and those who want their children
to receive an education given entirely by such individuals should be
able to entrust their children completely to establishments created for
this purpose. In this way, if you give birth to a child you desired, but
afterwards you separate from your companion, or for any other
reason you no longer desire the child, you will be able to entrust your
189

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

child to society, so that it may be brought up surrounded by the
harmony necessary for its fulfillment, for a child who grows up in
surroundings where it is not really and truly wanted cannot blossom
and be fulfilled.
Bringing up a child should be mutually fulfilling for both parent
and offspring. If a child becomes a nuisance, however slight, it realizes
this and fulfillment is affected. A child should therefore be kept near
you only if its presence is felt to be fulfilling.
Otherwise the child should be put in establishments that society
must create to encourage fulfillment and be placed there without the
least regret.
On the contrary, parents should feel a profound sense of joy
because they are entrusting their child to others more capable than
themselves of helping each little individual to blossom.
Regular visits can even take place if the children, whose wishes are
of primary importance, would like them. The people in charge of the
children’s education should always describe the parents as exceptional
people, who placed more importance on their children’s fulfillment
than on their own selfish pleasure of bringing them up themselves.
They did this, the children should be told, by entrusting them to
people more competent than themselves.
Choose your partner freely if you desire one. Marriage, whether
religious or civil, is useless. You cannot sign a contract to unite living
individuals, who are bound to change because they are alive.
Reject marriage, which is only the public proclamation of
ownership of a person. A man or woman cannot be the property of
anyone else. Any contract can only destroy the harmony existing
between two individuals.
When we feel loved, we feel free to love, but when we have signed
a contract, we feel like prisoners who are forced to love each other,
and sooner or later we begin to hate each other. So you will live with
the person of your choice only for as long as you feel happy with him
or her.
When you no longer get on well together, do not remain together,
because your union will become hell. All living beings evolve, and
190

T HE K EYS - F ULFILLMENT

rightly so. If the personal evolution of each individual is similar, the
union lasts, but if their progress is different, then union is no longer
possible. You no longer like the individual you used to like because
one of you has changed. You must part from each other while
retaining happy memories of your time together, instead of spoiling
it with useless bickering which gives way to hostility. A child chooses
clothes that fit, and when it outgrows them, they must be changed
for different clothes, otherwise they will be torn to pieces. The same
applies for unions; you must leave each other before being torn to
pieces.
Above all, do not be worried about your child. It is better for him
or her to be with only one parent in harmony than to be with both
in discord, or lacking perfect harmony. Do not forget that children
are, above all, individuals.
Society must make absolutely sure that old people have a happy life
without any material worries. But although we must respect the
elderly and do everything to make them happy, we should not listen
to them just because of their seniority.
An intelligent person can give good advice at any age, but a stupid
person, even if he is a hundred years old, does not deserve to be
listened to for a second. What is more, such a person has no excuse,
having had an entire lifetime in which to try to awaken, whereas there
is still hope for a young and stupid person. But in any case, a stupid
old person must still be able to live comfortably. This is a duty for
society.
Death should not be an occasion for sad gatherings; on the
contrary, it should be a time of joyful celebration, because it is the
moment when the beloved one may perhaps reach the paradise of the
eternals in the company of our creators, the Elohim.
You will therefore ask not to be buried religiously, but you will
donate your body to science, or you will ask that your body be
disposed of as discreetly as possible, except for the bone of your
forehead - more precisely the part located above the beginning of the
nose, 33 millimeters (1.3 inches) above the middle of the axis linking
the pupils of your eyes. At least one square centimeter (0.4 square
191

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

inches) of this bone should be sent to the Guide of Guides, so that he
may keep it in our embassy on Earth.
Each person is monitored by a computer that records all their
actions and will make a tally of them at the end of their life. But
people who know about this message which Claude Rael is
communicating will be re-created from the cells that they have left in
our embassy. In their cases, re-creation will take place only if they
ensure that the required part of their body is sent to the Guide of
Guides after their death.
The mechanism within the computer that records the information
to be used in judgement of individuals remains in operation after
they learn about the message. But the mechanism that allows an
automatic sampling of a cell at the moment of death is disconnected.
So only those who comply exactly with what is required once they
know about the message will be recreated.
Make sure that at least once in your life you see the Guide of
Guides or a guide authorized by him to transmit your cellular plan to
the Elohim, so that they may awaken your mind and help you to
remain awakened.
In accordance with what is written earlier in this message, you will
not leave an inheritance to your children, except for the family house
or apartment. The rest you will leave in your will to the Guide of
Guides, and if you fear your descendants might not respect your last
will and testament but might try to recover your property through
the courts, you will bestow it while you are alive on the Guide of
Guides, in order to help him spread the message of our creators on
Earth.
Those of you who remain after the death of a loved one, do not be
sad and lament. Try instead to give love to those you love while they
are still living, because once they are dead, what makes you unhappy
is the thought that perhaps you did not love them enough, and that
now it is too late.
Anyone who was good in their lifetime has the right to the
Elohim’s gardens for eternity and will know happiness, and anyone
who was not good does not deserve to be missed.
192

T HE K EYS - F ULFILLMENT

But even if an individual is not among those chosen for re-creation,
he or she does not really vanish. Death is not a very important thing,
and we should not be afraid of it. It is just like falling asleep, except
it is an endless sleep. Since we are a part of infinity, the matter of
which we are made does not disappear. It continues to exist in the
soil, or in plants, or even in animals, clearly losing all homogeneity
and, therefore, all identity. This part of infinity that was organized by
our creators according to a very precise plan returns to the infinite,
while remaining a part of this small ball called Earth, which is alive.
Everyone has the right to live, the right to love and the right to die.
Everyone is the director of his or her own life and death. Death is
nothing, but suffering is terrible, and everything must be done to
eliminate it. Someone who is suffering too much has the right to
commit suicide. If this person’s actions were positive during his or her
life, he or she will be admitted to the planet of the eternals.
If someone you love suffers very much and wishes to die, but does
not have the strength to commit suicide, help them to take their own
life.
When science one day enables you to eliminate human suffering,
then you can ask yourselves whether it is right to commit suicide or
not.

Society and Government
Just as a human body has a brain to make decisions, it is essential that
society also have a government to make decisions. So you will do
everything you can to set up a government that practices geniocracy,
which puts intelligence in power.
You will also participate in the creation of a worldwide political
party advocating humanitarianism and geniocracy, as they are
described in the first part of this message of the Elohim, and you will

193

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

support its candidates. Only via geniocracy can humanity move fully
into the golden age.
Total democracy is not good. A body in which all the cells
command cannot survive. Only intelligent people should be
permitted to make decisions involving humanity. You will therefore
refuse to vote, unless a candidate advocating geniocracy and
humanitarianism is standing for election.
Neither universal suffrage nor public opinion polls are valid ways
of governing the world. To govern is to foresee, not to follow the
reactions of a sheep-like population, among whom only a very small
number are sufficiently awakened to guide humanity. Since there are
very few awakened people, if we base decisions on universal suffrage
or opinion polls, the decisions become the choice of the majority and therefore of those who are not awakened. Such people respond in
the interests of their immediate gratification, or as a result of
instinctive reactions that are unconsciously confined in a straitjacket
of obscurantist conditioning.
Only geniocracy, which is a selective democracy, is worthwhile. As
was stated in the first part of this message of the Elohim, only people
whose net level of intelligence is fifty per cent above average should
be eligible to stand for election, and only those whose net level of
intelligence is ten per cent above the average should be eligible to
vote. Scientists are already developing techniques to measure net
intelligence. Follow their advice, and act in such a way that the most
precious minerals of humanity - exceptionally gifted children - may
receive an education at a level appropriate to their genius, since
normal education is designed only for normal children of average
intelligence.
It is not the number of diplomas that one has obtained that
signifies intelligence, since this only calls upon the rather
uninteresting faculty of memory, which machines can replace.
Intelligence in its raw state is the quality that can make peasants or
workers much more intelligent than engineers or professors. This can
be spoken of as common sense, as well as creative genius, because
most inventions are nothing more than a matter of common sense.
194

T HE K EYS - S OCIETY

AND

G OVERNMENT

As already stated, to govern is to foresee, and all the great problems
that humanity is now facing prove that past governments did not
have foresight and were therefore incompetent governments. The
problem does not lie with the people who govern, but rather, the
technique that is used to choose them: the problem is the way we
select those who govern us. Basic democracy must be replaced by a
selective democracy - that is geniocracy, which puts intelligent people
in power. This is a very fundamental requirement.
Human laws are indispensable, and you will respect them, while
seeing to it that those that are unfair or obsolete are changed.
Between human laws and those of our creators, you will not hesitate
one instant, as even the human judges will be judged some day by our
creators.
The police will be essential for as long as it takes society to discover
the medical means to eradicate violence and prevent criminals or
those who infringe the freedom of others from acting out their antisocial impulses.
Unlike soldiers, who are the keepers of war, police officers are the
keepers of peace, and they will remain indispensable until science has
solved this problem.
In countries where compulsory military service exists, you will
refuse to participate. Instead, ask to be granted the status of a
conscientious objector, which will allow you to serve in a division that
does not carry weapons, as is your right if your religious or
philosophical convictions forbid you to kill your fellow human
beings. This is the case for those who believe in the Elohim, our
creators, and want to follow the directives of the Guide of Guides of
the Raelian Movement.
Contrary to what many young people think, conscientious
objectors are not sent to jail, but serve instead in some civilian role or
in an unarmed division for a period that is double the normal
duration of military service.
It is better to spend two years working in an office than to be
trained for one year in techniques that enable you to kill fellow
human beings.
195

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Military service must be eliminated urgently in all the countries of
the world. All professional soldiers must be transformed into
guardians of world peace who work in the service of freedom and
human rights.
The only system of government that is worthwhile is geniocracy
applying humanitarianism. Capitalism is wrong because it enslaves
people to money, benefiting a few on the backs of others.
Communism is also wrong, since it places greater importance on
equality than on liberty. There must be equality among people at the
beginning, at birth, but not afterwards.
Although everyone has the right to have sufficient means to live
decently, those who do more for their fellow human beings have the
right to receive more than those who do nothing for the community.
This is obviously a temporary rule until human beings can have
robots to perform all menial labor, so that they can devote themselves
exclusively to their fulfillment, after having totally abolished money.
In the meantime, it is shameful that while some people are dying of
hunger, others throw food away to prevent prices collapsing. Instead
of throwing away this food, they should distribute it to those who
have nothing to eat.
Work must not be considered sacred. Everyone has the right to live
comfortably, even if they do not work, and should try to fulfill
themselves and blossom in whatever field attracts them. If people are
organized, it will not take them long to mechanize and automate all
indispensable work. Then everybody will be able to blossom freely.
If all individuals really set their minds to it, in only a few years
freedom from the need to work could be attained. What is required
is a marvelous burst of enthusiasm and solidarity in working for the
liberation of humankind from material constraints.
All humanity’s technical and scientific resources should be pooled,
and all those working in these areas should truly set their minds on
striving together for the well being of the entire community, rather
than for vested interests. Use all the resources, which are currently
wasted on military budgets or the inane development of nuclear
weapons - or even flights into space. Such things could be better
196

T HE K EYS - S OCIETY

AND

G OVERNMENT

planned and much more easily accomplished once humanity is free
of material constraints.
You have computers and electronic equipment that can better
replace manpower. Put them all to work, so that this technology can
truly operate in the service of humankind. In a few years you can
build a completely different world. You have reached the golden age.
Do everything possible to create the biological robot that will
release you from all menial labor and enable you to blossom and
fulfill yourselves.
Urban development must be reconsidered, as it is described in The
Book Which Tells The Truth. You must build very tall communal
houses situated in open country, so that individual houses do not
“devour” nature. Never forget that if everyone had a country house
with a small garden, there would be no more countryside. These
communal houses must be cities that are equipped with everything
people need and be capable of accommodating about 50,000
inhabitants each.
Until the day you become creators and can re-create it yourselves,
you must respect nature. By respecting nature, you respect those who
created it - our parents, the Elohim.
You will never make animals suffer. You may kill them to feed on
their flesh, but do this without making them suffer. Although as
already indicated, death is nothing, suffering is an abomination, and
you must avoid making animals suffer, as you must prevent human
beings from suffering.
Nevertheless, do not eat too much meat, and you will feel better
for it.
You may live on all that the land provides. You do not have to
follow a special diet; you may eat meat, vegetables, fruits and other
plants. But it is foolish to follow a vegetarian diet under the pretext
that you do not want to live on the meat of other living creatures.
Plants are alive just as you are, and suffer in the same way that you
do.
You must not cause suffering to plants that are alive, just as you are.
197

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Do not intoxicate yourself with alcoholic beverages. You may drink
a little wine while eating, for it is a product of the Earth. But never
intoxicate yourself. You may drink alcoholic beverages in exceptional
circumstances, but in very small quantities and accompanied by solid
food so that you never get drunk. Anyone who is drunk is no longer
capable of being in harmony with infinity, nor able to control
himself. This is something appalling in the eyes of our creators.
You will not smoke, for the human body was not made to inhale
smoke. This has appalling effects on the organism and prevents total
fulfillment and harmonization with infinity.
You will not use drugs. You will not drug yourself in any way, for
the awakened mind needs nothing outside itself to approach infinity.
It is an abomination in the eyes of our creators that people think they
must take drugs to improve themselves. Human beings have no need
to improve themselves because all are perfect, having been made in
the image of our creators.
To say that a human being is imperfect is to insult our creators who
made us in their image. But although we are perfect, we cease to be
so if we think of ourselves as imperfect and remain resigned to such
thoughts.
To remain perfect as the Elohim created us, we need to make an
effort at every moment of the day to keep ourselves in an awakened
state.

Meditation and Prayer
You should meditate at least once each day, locating yourself in
relation to infinity, in relation to the Elohim, to society, and yourself.
You should meditate upon awakening, so that your whole being
becomes fully conscious of infinity, and you are placed in full
possession of all your faculties.

198

T HE K EYS - M EDITATION

AND

P RAYER

You should meditate before each meal, so that all parts of your
body eat when you eat; and when you nourish yourself, think of what
you are doing.
Your meditation will not be a dry meditation, but on the contrary,
a sensual meditation. You will let yourself be engulfed by peace and
harmony until it becomes a pleasurable delight. Your meditation
should not be forced labor, but a pleasure. It is better not to meditate
at all than to meditate without really wanting to do so.
Do not impose meditation on your children or your family. But
explain to them the pleasure that it gives and the sense of well-being
that it brings, and if they then feel like meditating, try to teach them
what you know.
Think intensely of the Elohim, our creators, at least once a day,
and try to communicate with them telepathically. In this way you will
rediscover the original meaning of prayer. If you do not know how to
go about it, you can take your inspiration from the Lord’s Prayer, the
words of which are perfectly appropriate for communication with our
creators.
At least once a week attempt group telepathic communication with
the Elohim alongside other people from your region who believe in
them. If possible, you should be accompanied by a Guide.
Do your very best every year to attend the meeting of all those who
believe in the Elohim and in the message they have given to the last
of the prophets.
TECHNIQUE FOR ATTEMPTING
TELEPATHIC CONTACT WITH THE ELOHIM
Here is a model of what you could say while looking towards the
sky and thinking intensely about the words:
Elohim, you are there somewhere near those stars.
Elohim, you are there, and I know you are watching us.
199

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Elohim, you are there, and I would so much like to meet you.
Elohim, you are there, and what am I to hope to deserve a
contact?
Elohim, I recognize you as our creators, and I place myself
humbly at your service.
Elohim, I recognize Claude Rael, your messenger, as my guide,
and I believe in him and in the message you gave him.
Elohim, I will do my best to make the message known to those
around me because I know I have not done enough.
Elohim, I love all human beings as my brothers and sisters
because they are made in your image.
Elohim, I am trying to bring them happiness by opening their
minds to infinity and revealing to them what was revealed to me.
Elohim, I am trying to stop their suffering by placing my whole
being at the service of humankind, of which I am a part.
Elohim, I am trying to use to the utmost the mind you have given
me, to help humankind emerge from darkness and suffering.
Elohim, I hope that you will judge the little I have done by the
end of my life to be sufficient to grant me the right to eternal life
on the planet of the wise.
I love you, as you must have loved human beings to admit the
best of them among your eternals.

200

T HE K EYS - T HE A RTS

The Arts
Do as much as possible to encourage artists and to help your child if
he or she is attracted by the arts. Art is one of the things which best
enables you to harmonize with infinity. Consider every natural thing
an art, and every art a natural thing. Surround yourself with artistic
things, whether they appeal to your ears, your eyes, your sense of
touch, smell or taste.
Everything, which appeals to the senses, is artistic. There is more
than just music, painting, sculpture and all the officially recognized
arts.
Gastronomy is also an art, as well as perfume making, since they
both appeal to the senses. Standing above all finally, love is an art.
All art makes use of harmony, and therefore allows those who
appreciate it to be taken over by something harmonious. This
consequently produces the right conditions for placing oneself in
harmony with infinity.
Literature is particularly important because it contributes to
opening people’s minds by showing them new horizons. But
literature for literature’s sake is just prattle: what counts is not writing
beautiful sentences, but the transmission of new ideas to others
through reading. Audiovisual means are even more important, for
they appeal to our senses of sight and hearing at the same time. They
could well replace literature, since they are more complete.
Meanwhile, literature is useful for the time being.

Sensual Meditation
If you want to reach a high level of harmony with infinity, arrange a
place of sensual meditation for yourself. Place in it works of art,
paintings, reproductions, tapestries, posters, sculptures, drawings,
201

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

photographs or anything else that is intended to represent love,
infinity and sensuality, for the enjoyment of your eyes.
Arrange for yourself a corner where you can sit close to the ground,
on cushions, for example. Or lie down on a couch or on fur, for the
pleasure of touching it. Evaporate agreeable scents and oils to please
your nose. Have a tape recorder and a cassette on which you have
recorded music that you like for the pleasure of your ears.
Have trays and bottles filled with food and drink that you like for
the pleasure of your mouth, and invite one or several people you love,
who share your tastes and with whom you feel at ease and in
harmony; then feed your senses together and open your bodies in
order to open your minds in love and fraternity.
If someone appeals to you physically, and you feel that it is
reciprocal, invite him or her to this place. Together you can reach a
sublime state of harmony, which will enable you to approach infinity
by satisfying your five senses. To this state will be added the synthesis
of all these pleasures - the physical union of two individuals in total
harmony and in the illumination of the act of love.
Obviously, the harmony must first exist spiritually. In other words,
there must be a mutual attraction between the minds, and thus, the
bodies of the individuals in the way they approach and respect each
other. But a spiritual love is always made sublime by a fulfilled
physical love. To love is to give and expect nothing in exchange. If
you love somebody, you should give yourself to this person entirely if
he or she desires it.
Never be jealous, for jealousy is the opposite emotion to love.
When you love someone, you must seek his or her happiness first and
foremost, and in every way. To love is to seek the happiness of others,
and not your own.
If the person you love is attracted to another, do not be jealous; on
the contrary, be happy that the one you love is happy, even if it is
because of somebody else.
Love also the person who, like you, wants to bring happiness to the
person you love, and who therefore has the same goal as you. Jealousy
is the fear that someone else may make the person you love happier
202

T HE K EYS - S ENSUAL M EDITATION

than you do yourself, and that you may lose the one you love. But
instead of feeling jealous, we should try to do as much as possible to
make the person we love happy, and if somebody else succeeds better
in this, we should be happy about it. What counts is not that our
beloved be happy because of us but simply that they be happy,
whoever is responsible.
So if the person you love is happy with somebody else, rejoice in
this happiness. You will recognize the person who loves you in that he
or she will not oppose your happiness with someone else.
It is your duty to love the person who loves you that much and to
give him or her happiness yourself. In that direction lies the path of
universal love.
Do not reject someone who wants to make you happy, for by
accepting that he does so, you make him happy, and this is an act of
love. Rejoice in the happiness of others, so that they may rejoice in
yours.

Human Justice
Between human laws and those of our creators, you will not hesitate
one instant, as even the human judges will be judged some day by our
creators.
Human laws, as already stated, are essential. But they must be
improved upon because they do not take love and fraternity
sufficiently into consideration.
The death penalty must be abolished because no individual has the
right to kill another coldly in a premeditated, organized manner.
Until the time comes when through science, society is able to control
the violence that occurs in some people and can cure them of their
illness, you will keep criminals apart from society. Then give them the
love that they have lacked, while trying to make them understand the

203

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

monstrous nature of their actions. Give them also the desire to
redeem themselves.
Do not mix hardened criminals - who are suffering from an illness
that can be contagious - with people who have merely committed
petty offenses. That way you will avoid contaminating the lesser
offenders.
Never forget that all criminals are sick, and always consider them
as such. We are shocked when we remember that once upon a time
we used to suffocate people between mattresses if they suffered from
fits of hysteria. Some day, when we are able to cure, and more
importantly, prevent the sickness of crime, we will be just as shocked
when we look back at how we used to execute criminals.
Forgive those who have done you harm unintentionally, and bear
no grudge against those who have willingly done you harm. They are
ill, for one must be ill to harm one’s neighbor. Besides, think how
unfortunate those people are, who do harm others, because they will
not have the right to eternal life in the gardens of the Elohim.
But if someone wants to harm you or those you love, try to subdue
them. If you cannot, then you have the right to defend yourself to
save your own life or the lives of your loved ones. However, never
strike with the intention to kill, even in legitimate defense. Try only
to render the person harmless - by knocking him or her out, for
example. If the blow you give turns out to be fatal, you have nothing
to blame yourself for, as long as you did not have the intention to kill.
You will subdue violent people by non-violence, and if necessary,
by direct action. Violent behavior is intolerable, and you will not
tolerate it, even if you have to forcibly restrain violent people. But
always use a non-violent force, that is to say, a balanced force applied
without malicious intent, sufficient only to overcome those who try
to do harm.
Any threat of violence should be treated as seriously as an actual
violent deed. To threaten violence is to think it possible and to see it
as an acceptable way of achieving one’s goals. A person capable of
threatening another with violence is as dangerous as someone who
has already committed a violent act. Until we can find a medical cure
204

T HE K EYS - H UMAN J USTICE

for those who make such threats, they must be kept outside society,
and we must try to make them understand that their behavior is
dreadful.
When dealing with those who take hostages, think first of the lives
of innocent people who are in the hands of the hostage-takers. People
who take hostages are sick, and you should not give them what they
demand. Society, in fact, must never give in to them because by doing
so, you encourage other criminals to copy such actions and give
credence to their threats.
All human beings must have equal rights and opportunities at
birth, whatever race they may be. Discriminate against fools,
however, whatever the color of their skin. All the races that populate
the Earth were created by the Elohim, and must be equally respected.
Humanity as a whole must unite to form a world government, as
it is written in The Book Which Tells The Truth. Impose also a new
world language on all the school children of the entire world.
Esperanto exists, and if no one proposes anything better, choose
Esperanto.
Until it becomes possible to abolish money, create a new world
currency to replace national currencies. Therein lies the solution to
the monetary crisis. If no one can propose anything better, use the
federalist system. Create a federation from all the countries of the
world. Grant independence to regions, which need to be able to
organize themselves as they wish.
The world will live in harmony when it is no longer composed of
separate countries, but consists instead of regions united in a
federation to take charge of the destiny of the Earth.

Science
Science is the most important thing of all for humanity. You will keep
yourself in touch with the advances made by scientists who can solve
205

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

all problems. Do not let scientific discoveries fall into the hands of
those who think only of making profit, nor into the hands of the
military who keep certain inventions secret in order to retain a
hypothetical supremacy over illusory enemies.
Science should be your religion, for the Elohim created you
scientifically.
By being scientific, you please your creators because you are acting
as they do, and you show them that you understand that you were
made in their image and are anxious to take advantage of all the
potential that you have within you. Science must be used to serve and
liberate humankind, not to destroy and alienate it. Trust those
scientists who are not being manipulated by financial interests, and
only them.
You may participate in sports, for they are very good for your
equilibrium - particularly those sports that develop self-control.
Society should also authorize violent, and even very violent, sports.
These are safety valves. An evolved and non-violent society must have
violent games that maintain an image of violence, enabling young
people who wish it, to be violent with others who wish the same
thing. This also allows others to watch these violent exhibitions and
so release their aggressive energies.
You may participate in games that require thought and use of the
mind. But as long as money has not been abolished, never play to win
money; rather play for the pleasure of making your mind function.
You will date your writings counting the year 1946 as “year one”,
after Claude Rael, the last of the prophets. Then 1976 is therefore
year 31 after Claude Rael, or year 31 of the era of Aquarius, or year
31 of the age of the Apocalypse, or year 31 of the golden age.

206

T HE K EYS - T HE H UMAN B RAIN

The Human Brain
We still have a long way to go in fully understanding the potential of
the human brain. The sixth sense, direct perception, should be
developed in young children. This is what we call telepathy. Telepathy
enables us to communicate directly with our creators, the Elohim.
Numerous mediums have come to me asking what they should do,
because they had received messages from what they call “the beyond”,
asking them to get in touch with me in order to help me, and for me
to bring them “the light”. Mediums are very important people
because they have an above average gift of telepathy, and their minds
are already on the path to an awakened state. They should try to
practice meditation in order to fully master their potential.
I am eagerly waiting for all those mediums who have received such
messages to get in touch with me, so that we may organize regular
meetings. The true mediums who seek to be informed will all receive
instructions. The power of one brain is great, but the power of several
brains is infinite. Let those who have ears, hear.
Never forget that all those things, which you do not understand
and which scientists cannot explain, have been created by the Elohim.
The clockmaker knows all the parts of the clock he has made.

The Apocalypse
Do not forget that the Apocalypse - literally the “age of revelation” has arrived as was predicted. It has been said that when the time
comes, there will be many false prophets. You only have to look
around you to see that the time has indeed come. False prophets are
writers of horoscopes of which the newspapers are full, and there are
also many others who reject the benefits of science and cling to every
last letter of ancient writings that were the messages given by the
Elohim to the primitive people of ancient times.
207

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Such false prophets prefer to believe what narrow-minded and
primitive people have fearfully copied down long ago while listening
to those whom they considered to be gods because they came from
the sky. They should instead believe the message of the Elohim that
has been given now to people who no longer kneel stupidly before all
that comes from the sky. These latter people try to understand the
universe, and they can be addressed as adults.
But if you look around, you will see the crowds of fanatic and
obscurantist religious sects, which attract young impressionable
people thirsty for the truth.
A philosopher once said: ‘Jesus came to show people the path to
follow, and everybody kept staring at his finger.’ Meditate on this
sentence. It is not the messenger who matters, but the person who
sends the message, and the message itself.
Do not go astray among the sects of the East - the truth is not on
top of the Himalayas any more than in Peru or elsewhere. The truth
is within you.
But if you want to travel, and you like exotic places, go to all these
distant countries. You will understand then that you have wasted
your time, and that what you were looking for was inside you all the
time.
Travel within yourself, otherwise you are only a tourist - someone
who passes by and thinks he or she will find the truth by watching
others search for it within themselves. They may find it, perhaps, but
those watching them certainly will not. To travel inside yourself, you
do not need to take a plane.
The East has nothing to teach the West about wisdom and
awakening the mind. Rather, the opposite is true. How can you find
wisdom amongst people who die from hunger as they watch herds of
sacred cows go by?
On the contrary, it is the West with its intellect and its science that
comes to help people who, for ages, have been shackled by primitive
and murderous beliefs. It is not by chance that countries in the West
no longer face the same problems as those of the Third World. Where
the mind rules, the body does not die of hunger. Where obscurantism
208

T HE K EYS - T HE A POCALYPSE

prevails, the body cannot survive. Can primitive people solve the
problems of famine in the world and give food to those who are
starving? They already have enough difficulties trying to feed
themselves, and you expect to find wisdom there?
All the people of the Earth had the same chances at the beginning.
Some have solved their problems, and even have more than they
need, while others simply do not have the means to survive. In your
opinion, which ones can help the others? The people of the West still
have an enormous distance to go on the path of open-mindedness,
but the people of the East have not achieved one tenth of what the
people of the West have achieved.

Telepathic Communication
Mind and matter are eternally the same thing.
The Tibetan Book of the Dead.

If you want to have telepathic communication of a very high quality,
do not cut your hair or your beard. Certain people have a telepathic
organ that is sufficiently developed to work well even if their head is
shaved. But if you want to achieve the best results, then do not cut
what the creators have made grow on your head and face. If it grows,
there is a reason, for none of your physical characteristics were given
to you without reason. By respecting the creation, you respect the
creator.
The best moment to enter into communication with your creators is
on waking because as your body is emerging from sleep, your mind is
re-awakening too. A mechanism starts up at that point, a mechanism,
which you must activate by deliberately opening your mind as far as
possible to everything around you and to infinity. You should take
special care not to halt the process.
209

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Sit down cross-legged, or better still, lie on your back on the
ground. If possible, position yourself in the open air and look up
towards the sky.
The mind is like a rose. In the morning, it begins to open, but you
often prune it when it is still just a bud. If you would wait a little, it
would bloom.
To practice physical fitness is good, but to practice the physical
fitness of the mind is better.
Yet, do not be impatient if you do not obtain results right away.
When an organ is not used, it atrophies. When you have had a limb
in plaster for a long time, you need a lot of physical therapy to recover
its normal use.
Look up to the sky and think of your position in the context of
everything that surrounds you. Visualize yourself in relation to the
house that you occupy, a tiny speck lost between stone walls. See
yourself in relation to all the people who are waking up at the same
time as you, and in relation to those who, in other parts of the globe,
are going to bed. Think of all those who are being born, those who
are uniting with each other physically, those who are suffering,
working or dying at that time, all this while you are waking up.
Situate yourself in regard to your own level.
Situate yourself in relation to the infinitely large as well. Think of
the town where you are, a tiny speck lost in a landscape that is the
country, the continent or the island where you live. Then fly away in
your mind, as if you were in a plane travelling further and further
away from the ground, until the town and then the continent are
nothing but a tiny spot.
Be aware of the fact that you are on the Earth, a small ball where
humanity is but a parasite. It is always spinning although you do not
realize this is happening. Situate yourself in relation to it, and in
relation to the moon, which is revolving around the Earth, and in
relation to the Earth, which is revolving around the sun, and in
relation to the sun, which is itself rotating as it revolves around the
center of our galaxy. Situate yourself in relation to the stars that are
also suns, which have planets orbiting them. On these planets an
210

T HE K EYS - T ELEPATHIC C OMMUNICATION

infinite number of other beings live, and among them is the planet of
our creators, the Elohim, as well as the planet of the eternals, where
you may one day be admitted for eternity.
Locate yourself in relation to all those worlds where other living
beings live - some more advanced and some more primitive than we
are, and in relation to those galaxies which themselves revolve around
the center of the universe. Finally, situate yourself in relation to our
whole universe, which itself is an atom of an atom of a molecule
located perhaps in the arm of somebody who is looking up at the sky,
wondering whether there is life on other planets...
This is all in relation to the infinitely large.
Then situate yourself also in relation to your body, to all its vital
organs and the other parts of which it is made up. Think of all those
organs that are working without your noticing it, right at this very
moment.
Think of your heart, which is beating without your asking it to,
your blood, which circulates and irrigates your whole body, and your
brain, which enables you to reflect and be conscious of doing so.
Think of all the corpuscles that make up your blood and of all the
cells that are being born in your body, those feeling pleasure while
reproducing and those that are dying without your knowing it, and
perhaps without being conscious that they help form the individual
that you are.
Think too of all the molecules that constitute these cells, and the
atoms that constitute these molecules, revolving like suns around the
center of a galaxy, and of the particles that make up these atoms, and
of the particles of these particles on which there is life asking itself if
there is life on other planets...
This is all in relation to the infinitely small.
Place yourself in harmony with the infinitely large and with the
infinitely small by radiating love towards what is above and towards
what is below, and by being conscious that you yourself are part of
infinity. Then by thinking intensely, try to transmit your message of
love to the Elohim, our creators; try to transmit to them your wish to
see them, to be among them one day, to have the strength to deserve
211

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

it, to be among the chosen ones. Then you will feel light and ready
to do good around you with all your strength all day long, because
you will be in harmony with infinity.
You may also do these exercises in the sensual meditation room
during the day, alone or with other people. But the moment when
you come closest to perfect harmony with the infinite will occur
when this takes place in your room of sensual meditation with
someone you love, and you unite yourself physically with him or her,
and jointly harmonize yourselves with infinity during your union.
In the evening, when the sky is full of stars and the temperature is
mild, lie down on the ground. Look up at the heavens and think
intensely of the Elohim, wishing that some day you may deserve to
be amongst them, and thinking strongly that you are available and
ready to do exactly what they may ask of you, even if you do not
clearly understand why they are asking it. Perhaps you will see a signal
if you are sufficiently ready.
As you are lying there on your back, be aware of the extent to
which your organs of perception are limited, which explains the
difficulty you may have in conceiving of infinity. A force keeps you
nailed to the ground, you cannot fly off to the stars with a jerk, and
yet you do not see any rope holding you down.
Millions of people are listening to thousands of radio stations and
watching hundreds of television programs that are being broadcast in
the atmosphere, yet you do not see these waves of sound and vision,
and you do not hear them. Compasses all have their points drawn to
the north, and yet you neither see nor hear the forces that attract their
needles.
So I repeat again: your organs of perception are very limited, and
energies like the universe are infinite. Wake yourself up, and wake up
the organs you have within you, which will allow you to receive waves
that you are not yet picking up or do not even suspect. Simple
pigeons are able to find the north, and you, a human being, cannot.
Think about this for a moment.

212

T HE K EYS - T ELEPATHIC C OMMUNICATION

Furthermore, teach your children, whose organs are developing, all
about this. This is how the “new humanity” will be born, and their
faculties will be infinitely superior to those of present human beings.
When his growth is finished, a man who has never learned to walk
will always be a cripple, and even if he is taught later, he will always
be handicapped, even if he is very gifted. Therefore, it is during their
growth that you must open the minds of your children, so that all
their faculties may blossom, and they will turn into individuals who
have nothing in common with what we are: poor, narrow-minded,
primitive people.

The Reward
May this book guide those who recognize and love our creators, the
Elohim. May it guide those who believe in them and those who
remember to communicate telepathically with them, thus
rediscovering the original meaning of prayer. May it guide those who
do good to their fellow human beings. May it guide those who
believe in what was revealed to me and in what was revealed before
me, and those who are sure that scientific reincarnation is a reality. All
such people have a guide and an aim in life, and are happy.
As for those who are not awakened, it is useless to speak to them
about this message of the Elohim. One who is asleep cannot hear, and
the unconscious mind does not wake up in just a few moments especially if the person sleeping finds his or her sleep very
comfortable.
Spread this message around you to those who do good to their
fellow human beings. Spread it particularly among those who, by
using the mind that the Elohim gave them, are relieving society from
fear of food shortages, disease and the burden of daily exertions. They
do this by giving others time to fulfill themselves and blossom, and it

213

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

is for such individuals that the fountained gardens of the planet of the
eternals are reserved.
For it is not enough merely to avoid harming others without doing
them any good. Anyone whose life has been neutral will be entitled
to neutrality. That is to say, he will not be re-created, neither to pay
for crimes which have not been committed, nor to receive the reward
for non-existent good deeds.
Anyone who has made many people suffer during part of his life,
and then makes up for it by doing as much good as harm, will also
be neutral. To have the right to scientific reincarnation on the planet
of the eternals, one must have an unambiguously positive assessment
at the end of one’s life.
To be satisfied with doing good on a small scale around oneself is
enough for someone who is not of superior intelligence, or who does not
have many means, but it is not enough for someone who is very
intelligent or someone who has many means. A very intelligent person
has a duty to use the mind given to them by the Elohim to bring
happiness to others by inventing new techniques to improve their living
conditions.
Those people who will be entitled to scientific reincarnation on the
planet of the eternals will live in a world where food will be brought
to them without their having to make the slightest effort, and where
there will be marvelously beautiful female and male partners
scientifically created for the sole purpose of satisfying their pleasures.
They will live there eternally, seeking only to fulfill themselves doing
whatever pleases them. As for those who have made others suffer, they
will be re-created, and their suffering will be equal to the pleasure of
the eternals.
How can you not believe in all this now that science and ancient
religions are coming together perfectly? You were nothing but matter,
mere dust, yet the Elohim made you into living beings in their image
capable of dominating matter. Later you will again become matter or
dust, and they will make you live once more as they have created you,
scientifically.
214

T HE K EYS - T HE R EWARD

The Elohim created the first human beings without knowing that
they were doing what had already been done for them. They thought
they were only conducting a minor scientific experiment, and that is
why they destroyed almost all of humanity the first time.
But when they understood that they had been created just like us,
they began to love us as their own children, and swore never to try to
destroy us again, leaving us to overcome our own violence by
ourselves.
Although the Elohim do not directly intervene for or against
humanity as a whole, they do, however, exert influence on some
individuals whose actions please or displease them. Woe to those
claiming to have met the Elohim or to have received a message from
them if it is not true. Their life will become hell, and they will regret
their lie when faced with all the troubles they will encounter.
Also those who act against the Guide of Guides and try to prevent
him carrying out his mission, or who go along with him in order to
spread strife amongst those who follow him, they will also see their
life become hell.
Without any obvious influence coming from above, they will know
why disease, family and professional difficulties, emotional woes and
other problems will all invade their earthly existence while they await
their eternal punishment.
You who smile as you read these lines, you are among those who
would have crucified Jesus if you had lived in his time. Yet now you
want to see members of your family born, get married and die under
his effigy because this has become part of the morals and customs.
Behaving like those who went to see the lions devouring the first
Christians, you also direct ironic smiles at those who believe in these
writings, saying that they should spend some time in a psychiatric
asylum. Nowadays, when someone has disturbing ideas, he is no
longer crucified or fed to wild animals - this is far too barbaric.
Rather, such people are sent to a psychiatric asylum. Had these
establishments existed two thousand years ago, Jesus and those who
believed in him would have been confined there. As for those who
215

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

believe in eternal life, ask them why they weep when they lose a loved
one.
For as long as humankind was unable to understand the work of the
Elohim scientifically, it was natural for people to believe in an
impalpable “God”. But now that, thanks to science, you understand
that matter is infinitely large and infinitely small, you no longer have
an excuse to believe in the “God” that your primitive ancestors
believed in. The Elohim, our creators, intend to be recognized by
those who are capable now of understanding how life can be created
and can make the appropriate comparisons with ancient writings.
Those people will have the right to eternity.
Christians! You have read a hundred times that Jesus would return,
yet if he came back, you would put him in a psychiatric asylum.
Come, open your eyes.
Sons of Israel! You are still waiting for your Messiah, and yet you
do not open the door.
Buddhists! Your writings indicate that the new Buddha will be
born in the West. Recognize the anticipated signs.
Muslims! Mohammed reminded you that the Jewish people had
made an error in killing the prophets, and that the Christians had also
made an error in adoring their prophet more than the one who sent
him. So welcome the last of the prophets, and love those who sent
him.
If you recognize the Elohim as your creators, and if you love them
and wish to welcome them, if you try to do good to other people by
making as much use as you can of all your potential, if you think of
your creators regularly, trying through telepathy to make them
understand that you love them, if you help the Guide of Guides to
accomplish his mission, you will without a doubt be entitled to
scientific reincarnation on the planet of the eternals.
When humanity discovered the necessary form of energy to travel
to the moon, it also came to possess sufficient energy to destroy all
life on Earth.
‘The hour has drawn near, and the moon is rent asunder’ it says in
the Koran, Sura 54, Verse 1. Therefore, any day now, humanity can
216

T HE K EYS - T HE R EWARD

destroy itself. Only those who follow the last of the prophets will be
saved from destruction.
Long ago, people did not believe Noah, and they laughed at him
when he made preparations for the destruction. But they did not have
the last laugh.
When the Elohim told the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah to
leave the city without looking back, some did not heed those
warnings and were destroyed. Now that we have reached the stage
when humanity itself may destroy all life on Earth, only those who
recognize the Elohim as their creators will be saved from destruction.
You may still not believe any of this, but when the time comes, you
will think of these lines again, and it will be too late.
When the cataclysm takes place - and there is a good chance that
it will happen quite soon, given the way human beings are presently
behaving - there will be two sorts of people: those who have not
recognized their creators and have not followed the last of the
prophets, and those who have opened their eyes and ears and
recognized what was announced a long time ago.
The former will undergo the suffering and destruction in the final
furnace, and the latter will be spared and taken with the Guide of
Guides to the planet of the eternals. There they will enjoy a
marvelous life of fulfillment and pleasure with the sages of ancient
times. It is they who will be waited on by magnificent athletes with
beautifully sculptured bodies who will bring them sophisticated food
to savor in the company of men and women of unequalled beauty
and charm who will be entirely compliant to their desires.
Seated on couches wrought with gold and jewels,
Reclining thereon facing each other,
There will wait on them youths, who will not age,
Carrying goblets and ewers and cups filled out of a flowing
spring,
No headache will they get therefrom, nor will they be
intoxicated,
And carrying such fruits as they choose,
217

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

And flesh of birds as they may desire,
And there will be fair maidens with wide,
Lovely eyes,
Like pearls, we preserved,
As a reward for what they did.
The Koran, Sura 56, Verses 15-24.

You who believe in all that is written here, when the Guide of
Guides summons you somewhere, drop everything, for it might be
because he has received some information concerning the end. If you
are near him at that moment, you will be saved and taken away with
him, far from the suffering.
You who believe, do not pass judgement on the words or deeds of
the Elohim. The created does not have the right to judge his creator.
Respect our prophet, and do not pass judgement on his actions or his
words, for we hear through his ears, we see through his eyes, and we
speak through his mouth. If you lack respect for the prophet, you lack
respect for those who sent him, your creators.
The messages which were given earlier by the Elohim and all those
people who adhered fully to them over the centuries were right. But
the obscurantist systems that were built on these messages using those
who had a feeling for them were wrong. The Church is in the process
of disappearing, and it deserves just that.
As for the men and women of the Church, let those who have their
eyes open join the last of the prophets and help him spread
throughout the world the latest message that has been handed to him.
He will welcome them with open arms, and they will be able to
blossom and fulfill themselves completely, while remaining the
messengers of those in whom they had always believed. But this time
they will at last truly comprehend what the Elohim’s task was when
they created humanity and when they sent Jesus.
They will really be able to fulfill themselves, far from the
constraints of the Church, which is fossilized and encrusted with
crimes and criminal inquisitions thousands of years old. They will be
218

T HE K EYS - T HE R EWARD

able to do what they must do - make use of the organs their creators
gave them, for our creators do not like us failing to use the organs
they gave us.
The men and women of the Church will be able to enjoy their five
senses and unite physically forever, or for an instant of happiness with
whomsoever they please, without feeling guilty. It is now that they
should feel guilty - guilty of not using all that was given to them by
their creators. But released from their old constraints, they will truly
open people’s minds instead of putting them to sleep!
Already, there are almost no more seminarists, but people who are
unhappy - those who have in them the vocation to bring love around
them and to open people’s minds. Fifty years ago there were 50,000
seminarists; now there are only 500; this means that there are at least
49,500 unhappy people, human beings who have in them the
potential, which has been placed in them by our creators so that they
use it, to radiate. However, they do not feel attracted to this church
shrouded with crimes and darkness.
You who are among those 49,500 people feeling a need to radiate
the truth and do something for your fellow people; you who want to
remain faithful to your creators and to Jesus who told you to love one
another and to respect your creators, “the Father who art in heaven”;
you who feel that this message is true, come with us and become
Guides, that is to say, people who devote themselves to the Elohim in
the tradition of Moses, Elijah and Jesus, and to the spreading of their
messages, while continuing to live a normal life, truly fulfilling
yourselves and enjoying all the senses that your creators gave you.
You who are presently members of the Church, take off those
clothes that are as sad as their color, the color of the crimes that have
been committed under their facade. Come with us and become
guides for humanity on the path of universal peace and love.
Leave those churches that are nothing but monuments built by
primitive people, temples where they could adore worthless things pieces of wood and metal. The Elohim do not need temples in every
city to feel loved. It is sufficient that human beings try to
communicate with them telepathically, thereby rediscovering the
219

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

original meaning of prayer, but also opening themselves to infinity
and not shutting themselves away in obscure, mystical stone
buildings.
Hypocrisy and mystification have lasted long enough. Using
truthful messages as their basis, organizations were built and grew fat
on them, living in misplaced luxury and using people’s fear to achieve
their own ends. Wars were even waged under the pretext of spreading
these messages abroad. Shame!
The money of the poor has been used to build a financial power base.
Shame!
Love for one’s neighbor has been preached with weapons in hand.
Shame!
Human equality has been preached while supporting dictatorships.
Shame!
‘God is with us!’ was said to encourage people to launch themselves
into fratricidal wars. Shame!
Many times has the following Gospel passage been quoted:
And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your
Father, which is in heaven. Matthew 23: 9.

Yet in the Church they make sure they themselves are constantly
called “Father” and “Monsignor” and “My Lord”. Shame!
Other texts have been read again and again that say:
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip
for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves.
Matthew 10: 9-10.

Yet they have been wallowing in the luxury of the Vatican. Shame!
The Pope, if he does not sell all the properties of the Vatican to help
unfortunate people, will not be admitted among the righteous on the
planet of the eternals. It is shameful to wallow in luxury acquired at the
220

T HE K EYS - T HE R EWARD

expense of poor people by using true messages and by exploiting the
births, marriages and deaths of human beings.
If all this changes, and if those people who were a part of that
monstrous organization without understanding their mistake now leave
it and regret their error, they will be forgiven and entitled to eternity. For
the Elohim, our creators, love us, their children, and forgive all those
who sincerely regret their errors.
The Church has no reason to exist any longer, for it was entrusted
with spreading the message of Jesus in anticipation of the age of the
Apocalypse, and this age has now come. Also the Church has used
methods of disseminating information that are a shame to it.
Although it has accomplished its mission, the Church will be
reproached for all its crimes, and those who still wear its clothes
covered with blood will be among the guilty.
Wake up slumberer that you are! This is no fabricated story. Reread all the writings of the ancient prophets, inform yourself about
the most recent scientific discoveries - especially in biology - and look
at the sky.
The predicted signs are there. The UFOs - unidentified flying
objects - which mankind has dubbed “flying saucers”, are appearing
every day.
‘There will be signs in the sky’ - that was written a long time ago.
Once you have informed yourself of these things, integrate them all
in your mind, and wake up. Claude Rael exists, he is indeed alive, and
he has not written what Moses, Ezekiel, Elijah, Jesus, Mohammed,
Buddha and all the others wrote. He is not a biologist, but he is the
last of the line of prophets, the prophet of the Apocalypse - that is, of
the time when everything can be understood.
He is living among you right now; you are lucky enough to be one
of his contemporaries, and you are able to receive his teaching. Wake
up! Pull yourself together, and take to the road. Go and see him, and
help him - he needs you. You will be one of the pioneers of the final
religion, the religion of religions, and you will have your place,
whatever may happen, among the righteous for eternity, savoring the
221

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

delights of the planet of the eternals in the company of wonderfully
pleasant beings who are ready to fulfill all your desires.

The Guides
You will follow the Guide of Guides, for he is the ambassador of the
Elohim, our creators, “our Fathers who art in Heaven”. You will
follow all the advice that is given in this book, because it is the advice
of your creators, transmitted by Claude Rael, our ambassador, the last
of the prophets, the shepherd of shepherds, and you will help him to
build the religion of religions.
Jews, Christians, Muslims, Buddhists and all you who have other
religions, open your eyes and your ears; re-read your holy writings,
and you will understand that this book is the last one - the one
predicted by your own prophets. Come and join us to prepare for the
coming of our creators.
Write to the Guide of Guides, and he will put you in touch with
other people who, like you, are Raelians - that is, people who
understand the message transmitted by Claude Rael. He will put you
in touch with a Guide in your region, so that you may meet regularly
to meditate and act to spread this message, so that it becomes known
throughout the world.
You who are reading this message, be aware that you are privileged,
and think of all those who do not yet know about it. Do all you can
to make sure that no one around you is ignorant of these fantastic
revelations, without ever trying to convince those to whom you
speak. Bring this message to their notice, and if they are ready, they
will open up by themselves.
Constantly repeat to yourself this sentence of Gandhi: ‘It’s not
because no one sees the truth that it becomes an error.’
You who feel such joy in reading this message, and who wish to
radiate this truth and make it shine around you, you who want to live
222

T HE K EYS - T HE G UIDES

by devoting yourself totally to our creators, by scrupulously applying
what they ask, by training to guide humanity on the path of
blossoming and fulfillment, you should become a Guide if you want
to be fully capable of this.
Write to the Guide of Guides, to Claude Rael, and he will welcome
you and arrange an initiation, which will enable you to radiate this
truth fully; for you can open the minds of others only if your own
mind is open.
The love of the creators for their work is immense, and you should
return this love to them. You must love them as they love you, and
prove it by assisting their ambassador and his helpers, putting all your
means and all your strength at their service, so that they may travel
all over the world to spread this message and build an embassy to
welcome our creators.
If you wish to help me realize the goals set by the Elohim, write to
me, Rael at:
International Raelian Movement
Case Postale 225, CH 1211
Geneva 8
Switzerland
or by email to: headquarters@rael.org
Also, do not forget that regular local meetings of people who
believe in this final message are held on the first Sunday of April, on
the 6th of August, the 7th of October and the 13th of December each
year. The venues for these meetings will be set out in the liaison
bulletin of the Raelian Movement of your country, and some
addresses to help you make contact are listed at the end of this book.

223

B
O O K
T H R E E
___________________________________
LET’S WELCOME THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIALS

1
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

This chapter provides Rael’s answers to those questions that were
most frequently raised by journalists during radio and television
interviews in which Rael participated worldwide in the years
immediately following the publication of his first two books in the
mid-1970s.

Seeming Contradictions Between
the First and Second Message
QUESTION:
The first contradiction which appeared between the first and
second message was found in the beginning of the dialogue which
took place between the Eloha and you. In the first message, when
you asked him if it would be possible to visit his planet, he replied:
‘No, you could not live there because the atmosphere is very
different from yours, and you are not sufficiently prepared to
support the journey.’ Nevertheless, at the time of the second
meeting on October 7th, 1975 (31), you were taken in one of their
machines, and you spent nearly 24 hours on the planet of the
Eternals.
We would remark that on the first contact, the machine appeared
progressively, showing a flashing red light at about ten meters altitude
227

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

and descending slowly. When the machine was low enough for you
to see the upper part, a strong white light was flashing on its top,
whereas at the time of contact for the delivery of the second message,
the machine appeared instantly behind the bushes at Roc Plat,
without any flashing lights and at ground level. Also, when it
returned, it disappeared instantly once you had descended from it, as
if it had disintegrated.
Another contradiction: At the time of the first contact, the Eloha
had his face surrounded by some sort of halo, which he later
explained was a sort of space helmet composed of waves, whereas at
the time of the most recent meeting, he had nothing surrounding his
face. This contradiction is elsewhere strengthened by what is stated
on page 30 in the first message: ‘Thou canst not see my face: for there shall
no man see me, and live’, Exodus 33:20, and this biblical citation is
explained thus: ‘If man came on our planet, he would see the creators
without their space helmets, but he would die because the
atmosphere would not be suitable for him.’ How do you explain this?
ANSWER:
The explanation for these seeming contradictions is very simple
and can be summarized in one word: psychology.
When one decides to come and make contact with a person living on
a primitive planet, even though he was created to accomplish a very
specific mission, there are certain precautions which must be taken so as
not to irreversibly damage his psyche. To see a machine appearing in the
sky equipped with flashing lights is not traumatic for a man living in a
scientifically developed country of our time. He is more or less used to
seeing satellites and rockets on TV and has already seen airplanes and
helicopters since his childhood and understands, to some extent, how
they operate. The best way to make an appearance without frightening
him is to make a gradual approach with a machine equipped with
flashing lights like his own airplanes and helicopters, well known to him.
Man would find that almost normal and would only be surprised at the
absence of noise from a machine seemingly made of metal, and
228

FAQ - S EEMING C ONTRADICTIONS B ETWEEN

THE

F IRST

AND

S ECOND M ESSAGE

consequently very heavy. The being who appeared to him would have to
be dressed in a way resembling how man expects present air pilots and
astronauts to be dressed. The sort of space helmet covering the face
would give him confidence, by reminding him of the pilots of Earth’s
flying machines with which he was well acquainted. Thus they would be
able to reach their objective not to panic the person contacted, and at
the same time allowing him to see technology which is still unknown to
people on Earth, so that he will understand that he has discovered
visitors from another planet.
At the time of the second encounter, when the flying machine
appeared more brutally, the Elohim were using their technology
without camouflage before a witness whom they knew was
sufficiently prepared psychologically so as not to be traumatized. If
they had appeared so brutally at the first encounter, the shock would
have been too great, and my mental balance would have been too
disturbed at that time, when I wasn’t expecting anything. In spite of
all their precautions, the nervous shock brought on the beginning of
stomach ulcers, which took several months to heal. The message was
“sweet in my mouth, but bitter in my stomach”. It would have been
even more serious without the approach precautions which they took.
Up to our present day and age, our creators were only appearing
while trying to impress their creation to the maximum, as incapable
as they were to understand who these beings from the sky were. The
Elohim’s main objective was to make Man believe, even if they did
not understand. Now that we are reaching the Age of Apocalypse,
which means the “Age of Revelation”, that is to say, the age when
everything can be understood, and not the “end of the world”, as
some would like you to believe and as you can check in any
dictionary, they have decided to appear while trying to be understood
and recognized as our creators, those of which all the religious books
of the Earth are talking, including The Bible, in which they are called
the “Elohim”. This bible was dictated to the first human beings
precisely with the aim to be recognized, now that millennia have
passed and human knowledge has progressed sufficiently. In this way,
229

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

we can look at what is coming from the sky without kneeling to pray
and shouting “miracle”.
Finally, it must be remembered that the Elohim had decided to test
me before giving me the complete message, so they went at it most
progressively.
In spite of my insistent wish to take a trip in their vessel, they cut
short my demands by stating that it was impossible for me to do so,
just as people sometimes tell their children that if they drank alcohol
they would stop growing. They added the example of the verse in
Exodus, which they addressed to primitive men so that they would
stay aloof. These primitives were meant to believe without, above all,
trying to understand.

Dating the Works of the Elohim
QUESTION:
The Elohim said they created life on Earth 25,000 years ago. How
is it that we find traces of animal bones as old as many hundreds of
thousands of years?
ANSWER:
The Elohim have explained that they did not create our planet.
When they decided to pursue their experiments of creating life
scientifically in a laboratory, they set out to search the universe for a
planet which would have a suitable atmosphere, allowing them to
work easily. The Earth proved to be positive after many tests and
analyzes.
Then they came down to our planet and created the life forms we
now know, including humans.

230

FAQ - D ATING T HE W ORKS O F T HE E LOHIM

It doesn’t mean, that 10,000 or 20,000 years before their arrival,
there wasn’t another creation on Earth that could have been destroyed
by a natural or an artificial catastrophe.
Imagine that an atomic war breaks out tomorrow, and all life on
Earth is destroyed. Then 10,000 years later, extra-terrestrials settle
down to create new living organisms, intelligent beings who would
discover traces of our civilization after a slow scientific progression;
these same beings would find it hard to believe that beings coming
from the sky had created them scientifically, using as proof the bones
which they found to be older than 25,000 years, our bones! They
might even find the far older bones of mammoths that we ourselves
still find existing in the debris of our time because the life that exists
on Earth at present is not the first one to be created, and it won’t be
the last.
There has been an infinity of creations on our planet, but also an
infinity of destructions, due for the most part to a lack of wisdom by
those who were the equivalent to our humanity.

The People of Israel and the Jews
QUESTION:
In the first message, on page 18, it is written that the people of
Israel were elected at one of the Elohim’s competitions, as the most
successful humanoids as far as intelligence and genius are concerned.
Then in the second message on page 170, it is written ‘The Jews are
our direct descendants on Earth. That is why a special destiny is
reserved for them. They are the descendants of the ‘Sons of Elohim
and the daughters of men’, as written in Genesis. Is this not
contradictory?

231

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

ANSWER:
The people who were chosen by our creators, the Elohim, as being
the most accomplished, were the people of Israel, who had been
created in a laboratory at this location on our planet. It is perhaps
because these people were the greatest success that the Sons of the
Elohim were tempted by their females and had children by them,
from whom the Jewish people descend. That is how the race
populating the soil of Israel became the Jewish people.

The Raelian Movement and Money
QUESTION:
In the first book, it is written on page 86:
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth... No man can
serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve Yahweh and mammon. Matthew 6: 19-24.

And the Vatican is vigorously attacked for its riches, while the
Raelian Movement is asking for money from its members. Is it not
falling into the same trap as the Vatican?
ANSWER:
One must not compare those who live in luxury and opulence,
recommending their faithful to live poorly, and who use these poor
people’s money to maintain a myriad of bishops and cardinals, to
increase continually their real estate investments, to maintain a palace
of another era with guards wearing halberds; one must not compare
these Roman usurpers with a movement that has not, nor will ever
232

FAQ - T HE R AELIAN M OVEMENT A ND M ONEY

have, a paid clergy: that had not, nor will ever own three-quarters of
the houses and real estate in a capital where people are having
problems finding suitable lodgings, as is the case in Rome, where they
refuse to rent to whoever it may be for fear of devaluation of the
investment; that has not, and never will have a princely palace
crumbling under the heaviness of gold and silver.
We have indeed a need for a lot of money, but it will be used to
attain these precise objectives:
1. Translate the messages of the Elohim into every language, and
bring them to the attention of all the peoples of the Earth.
2. Build an embassy where the Elohim will be able to meet men
officially. This embassy will be neither a princely palace nor a
cathedral, but rather a simple house possessing the comforts to
which all modern men are entitled, with the kind of diplomatic
immunity that even the smallest state has for its embassy.
Finally, if by good fortune, we succeed in obtaining more money
than we need to realize the first two objectives that I have already
pointed out, and in such a short space of time that we have not yet
managed the diffusion of the message all over the planet, we will then
use the excess money to build a research centre near the embassy. This
centre will bring together all the scientists who wish to work on the
creation of life in a laboratory, allowing Mankind to equal their
creators. The creation of biological robots will allow the elimination
of work and consequently money. Also, we plan to build a school for
the geniuses and the gifted. These research teams will be able to work
freely, outside the exploiting laboratories, the multinational trusts
and the suffocation of geniuses by state systems.
In this way they will have the opportunity to work without fear of
seeing their inventions fall into the hands of politico-military powers,
seeking to use new discoveries to build ever more destructive
armaments.

233

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Nothing is Constant in Space and Time
QUESTION:
In the first book on page 89, you wrote that the planet of the
Elohim is a little less than a light year away, that being the distance
that light can travel in one year, or nine thousand billion kilometers,
since light moves at about three hundred thousand kilometers per
second. Our present day scientists state that the closest star outside
our sun is located four light years away. How do you explain the
difference?
ANSWER:
The Elohim do not want us to know exactly where their planet is
located. This is quite understandable when we consider man’s
persistence towards destruction, even though the level of technology
on Earth is still fairly primitive.
That will all be revealed in more detail when they will officially
arrive in the embassy that we will build for them. In the meantime,
we can only ask questions.
Scientific members of our movement have put forth an hypothesis:
the distance between their planet and ours could be about four light
years by following the light, which could be moving in a pronounced
curve, but would only be one light year away if we travelled in a
straight line. That is a possibility.
I might add that light does not move at the same speed in all strata
of the universe, because nothing is invariable, neither in space nor
time. This is one of the biggest errors that present scientists are
committing. They start with an observation based on a limited period
of time to draw conclusions bearing on the past thousands of years
and on the time to come, or they base conclusions on a limited space,
to draw conclusions on the infinity of space. Man has always made
the same mistake of judging according to his knowledge. Those who
used the horizon as a base reasoned that the Earth had to be flat.
234

FAQ - N OTHING I S C ONSTANT I N S PACE A ND T IME

This is also true for historical dating, such as the methods based on
radioactivity named “Carbon 14”, potassium-argon, uranium-leadthorium or all other such methods. There exists a very interesting
book which explains all of this very seriously for the scientists who
might be interested: I am referring to Evolution or Creation (see
bibliography at the end of this book). In short, the error in these
dating methods is to start with the principle that the present atomic
movement has always been the same, and starting from there, to
make calculations based on false information, because nothing is
invariable in the universe in time or in space.
To illustrate this error, let’s take a 25 year old human, for example,
and measure his growth in one year, about one millimeter is a good
average for most subjects. Starting from there, we could establish that
the man is 1,750 years old, because he measures 1.75 meters. We
would forget that the growth of this young man has never been
invariable. The first year, he grew more than 500 millimeters (since
conception), between four and five years only 60 millimeters,
between seven and eight years only 30 millimeters, but between 14
and 15 years another 80 millimeters! As you will see, nothing is
constant, all efforts to determine the subject’s age, starting from a
partial observation of his growth, would be a total failure. One could
note that if we started at 60 centimeters in the first year of growth, to
estimate the age of the person, in 21 years of such growth, we could
predict that this individual would measure 12.6 meters at age 21.
QUESTION:
In the first book on page 13, you wrote that the Elohim had
created the original continent 25,000 years ago, from which
fragments later detached to form the continents we now know. The
American continent continued to separate itself from Europe by a few
centimeters each year according to certain scientists, or by a metre
each year as others claim. Be that as it may, even if it is one metre per
year, in twenty-five thousand years, we will reach 25,000 meters or 25

235

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

kilometers, but the North American continent is many thousands of
kilometers away from Europe. How can this be explained?
ANSWER:
The reply to this question is exactly the same as to the previous
question. In the growth pattern of a human being, the relation
between the first year and the 21st year is 600 to one. It is a thousand
times greater when we speak of the separation of the continents.
Here again nothing is invariable neither in time nor space.
Actually, the continents separate only a few centimeters each year
perhaps, but in the beginning, they separated by many hundreds of
kilometers each year.
Recently there occurred an earthquake near the Arabian peninsula,
and people were surprised to note that a fault was created, separating
two regions by a metre in only one night.
And yet we are in a relatively calm period of the Earth’s history, the
side effects of “the storm” of the creation of the original continent by
our Fathers have had time to calm down in 25 millennia. In the
infinity of time and space, nothing is invariable, not in matter, not in
energy.

Transmission of the
Cellular Plan and the Forehead Bone.
QUESTION:
It is asked of all those who recognize Rael as having been sent by
our creators, the Elohim, and being the last of the prophets, to have
their cellular plan transmitted by him, or by a Guide qualified to
officiate by him, all this so that the genetic code of each Raelian may
be preserved, so as to permit an eventual re-creation on the planet of
236

FAQ - T RANSMISSION O F T HE C ELLULAR P LAN A ND T HE F OREHEAD B ONE

the Eternals. On the other hand, each Raelian is also asked to take the
necessary precautions in his or her will, so that the forehead bone be
sent to the Guide of Guides after his or her death; to what will that
avail, since the transmission of the cellular plan has already taken
place?
ANSWER:
The transmission of the cellular plan is a recognition of the Elohim
as being our creators, performed by each Raelian while still alive. The
conservation of the forehead bone is a recognition of the Elohim as
being our creators, even after death. Together they constitute a
recognition “in life as in death”. The cellular plan or genetic code of
each individual is registered in an enormous computer which records
all our actions during our life, from the time of our conception, from
the meeting of the ovule and the spermatozoon, the moment when a
new genetic code is registered, hence a new individual. This
individual will be followed throughout his lifetime, and at the end of
his life, the computer will know if he has the right to eternal life on
the planet where the Elohim accept only the most conscious of men
and women.
QUESTION:
What happens to a Raelian who dies in an accident and whose
body is completely destroyed?
ANSWER:
If the Raelian in question has taken precautions in his will, asking
that his forehead bone be sent to the Guide of Guides, there is no
problem, since it will be registered by the computer which surveys
every one of us during the whole of our existence. In the same way,
there is no problem for the Raelians who die without the authorities
respecting their last will and testament, by refusing the removal of the

237

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

said forehead bone. What is important is that each Raelian make his
or her will known in the manner asked.
When there will be millions of Raelians, the government will be
forced to see that their last will and testament are respected by law.
The last will and testament of the first Christians were not respected
either, so long as they were in a minority. Raelism will be the
dominant religion in the world of the third millennium, and then the
last will and testament of all Raelians will be respected.
QUESTION:
The majority of people die old. Are they re-created old, and will
they live eternally old?
ANSWER:
Obviously not! A person who is fortunate in being re-created to
live eternally on the planet of the Eternals is re-created young with a
body in full possession of its force and its resources. At each recreation, they will be re-created the same way eternally.
QUESTION:
It is written that only those who follow you will be saved. If a
person has had a life turned towards happiness and the blossoming of
humanity, but has never heard of the messages of the Elohim, has that
person no chance of being saved?
ANSWER:
This person is among the just and will be saved. That part of the
messages concerns those who have read the messages. Among them,
only those who have decided to follow the rules given by our creators
will be saved. But if there are people on Earth who live in seeking
above all to help the progress of humanity, or to help their fellow men
to the most of their ability, and who die without having known the
238

FAQ - T RANSMISSION O F T HE C ELLULAR P LAN A ND T HE F OREHEAD B ONE

messages of our Fathers, they will be among the just and will be
saved. It will be more pardonable for those who do not know about
the messages and who act positively than for those who know of
them, because the latter have no excuse not to have changed their
conduct or to have paid even more attention to their actions.

Is the Earth an Atom of the Finger of God?
QUESTION:
The message explains that our planet is but an atom of an atom of
the gigantic being of which we are just a part, just as there is
intelligent life in the atoms of the atoms of which we are composed.
But the great being of which we are only a part, could it not be
considered as “God”?
ANSWER:
It all depends on what we mean by the word God. If we are
thinking of Infinity, then yes, but only in part; because this gigantic
being of which we are only a part, also lives on a planet which is an
atom of another gigantic being and so on to infinity.
If we mean by “God” a being having power over us, not at all,
because there is no such “God”.
The infinitely great being of which the Earth is but an atom, has
no power over us, because one must not forget that for that being,
time passes much more slowly. The time it takes for that being to
think of something, for us a few millennia have passed. The time
taken for beings who live on one of the atoms of our atoms to think
of something, is for us, a billionth of a billionth of a second. This
infinitely small being could think that we are “God”, and would be
just as wrong as us if we considered the being that we are a part of to
be something divine. The universe being infinite, there can be no
239

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

centre, which eliminates the possibility of the existence of an allpowerful and omnipresent God!
The Infinite is omnipresent, and we are a part of it as it is a part of
us. But it has no power over us, and it is “infinitely” indifferent to our
decisions or our behavior. After all, there is nothing to prove that the
great being of whose particles we are the parasites, is human. It is
perhaps a dog or a worm (the only thing that could be proven by the
Elohim is that it is something alive).

Noah’s Ark – A Space Craft?
QUESTION:
The messages state that Noah’s Ark was a spaceship. However,
there was a discovery a few years ago in a glacier on Mount Ararat of
the remains of a boat, which some claimed to be the debris from
Noah’s Ark which, it would appear, was a boat. How do you explain
that?
ANSWER:
The pieces of wood which were found have recently been analyzed,
and it was estimated they were not older than seven hundred years,
which would put Noah’s Ark at around AD1200. Even if we admit
that the dating system makes enormous errors, and that one
multiplies the dating by three, one would obtain two thousand years,
which would place the flood at the beginning of the Christian era,
which makes no sense. Even if one day the remains of a wooden boat
were found dating back about five thousand years, which would
correspond with the period of the flood, that would not prove that
Noah’s Ark was a wooden boat. One would certainly find near Mount
Ararat pieces of a wooden boat dating back to the epoch of the true
flood, because at the time when Noah built his spaceship destined to
240

FAQ - N OAH ’ S A RK : A S PACE C RAFT ?

save certain humans from destruction, there were in the ports of his
country some wooden boats, which had been carried by the
enormous tidal waves at the time of the huge explosions responsible
for the destruction of all life on Earth. Just as today we can find in
Florida, not far from the modern American rocket-site which carried
the astronauts to the Moon, some magnificent sailing boats
constructed with wood, and superb yachts belonging to American
millionaires.
In the case of an atomic war, certain explosions could activate
enormous tidal waves, which would carry away the boats to the tops
of the closest mountains, like pieces of straw. The eventual survivors
could, on finding the debris of those boats some centuries later,
deduce that there must have been an enormous flood to carry them
there; and, since certain writings report that some humans had been
saved from this flood, having been protected on board a vessel, they
would be certain that these would be the vessels in question.
There is a very important point which helps us to understand
clearly that the flood was not the result of a continual rainfall as is
generally thought, but the result of a colossal cataclysm, having
completely, and in a very brutal manner, overturned the surface of the
Earth. If it had been caused by continual rain, all the boats would
have been saved, and of course all the sailors and navigators of that
epoch would have survived without the least problem. Now it is
clearly written that only those who were in Noah’s Ark survived,
which makes sense, it being the only spaceship!

Life After Life – or Dream and Reality?
QUESTION:
A book was published recently which related the testimonies of
people who were brought back to life after having been in a coma,
and nearly all of them told the same story of the visions they had as
241

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

death approached – a vision of harmonious people wearing white
robes and singing, a vision of people who had disappeared, etc. You
claim that after death there is nothing if the Elohim do not intervene
to re-create those who die. How do you explain this consistency in
testimony, and does it not prove the existence of a soul?
ANSWER:
All that happens in the human brain is but the result of electrochemical reactions. Be it of love, of hate, of pleasure, of suffering, of
imagination, or all other states of mind, sentiment or sickness; the
process depends in every case on the chemical reactions produced in
the interior of the brain, and the resulting electrical impulses or
messages, be they visual, auditory, based on memory, or an
interpretation of new events based on elements that one has in the
memory.
When we breathe very deeply and rapidly, we feel elated very soon,
and if we make one hundred people do the same thing, their
experience will all be consistent. If we make one hundred people run
one kilometer, they will all be out of breath. Every given
phenomenon corresponds to a given physical reaction, which will be
the same for everyone. When an individual falls into a coma, the
brain is irrigated by the blood in a certain manner, and the brain cells
are thus oxygenated in a certain way, and these chemical facts
produce certain reactions which are about the same for all of us.
If we place acid on limestone, it will always make a foam. If we hit
the heads of one hundred people strong enough for them to fall into
a coma, they will all have the impression of having seen the same
thing. Indeed, they would describe only that which was stored in
their memory of the chemical reactions to which they were subjected.
It is a bit like when we dream. Nobody would think of saying that
because he met 10 other people who all dreamt that they were being
chased by a bull that was 10 meters high and spitting flames, that
since many people reported the same thing, these sorts of bulls must
exist. We have all dreamt, at one time or another, that we could fly,
242

FAQ - L IFE A FTER D EATH O R D REAM

AND

R EALITY

just by giving a little push with our feet; but no one seriously believes
that this proves that they can fly around with the swallows, or that
such a thing would be possible, because thousands of people have had
the same dream. One must not interpret these dreams as reality, even
if science endeavors to realize them technically, by building an
apparatus one day which really allows us to fly. Something which all
of those who were in a coma remember well, is that they were not
anxious to return to their body, and this is really not surprising. It
would be more accurate to say that they had no desire to be conscious
of their body again, just as when we come out of a very sweet dream
in the company of the opposite sex, for example, and we try to go
back to sleep to recapture the happiness which we experienced.
The fact that all ex-comatose people describe almost the same
experience proves that identical chemical reactions were produced in
the human brain, hence their reactions to electrical phenomena are
also identical. If we implant electrodes in 1,000 human brains, in
exactly the same locations, and we send them an identical electrical
charge, they will all feel the same thing and have the same visions.
This is exactly what happens at the time of death. If certain privileged
people deserve re-creation on the planet of the Eternals after their
death, this will happen only when total death has occurred, and
nothing will happen so long as the person is in a coma, therefore
alive.

The Elohim’s Scientific Level of Development
QUESTION:
There does not seem to be as great a time-lag as one would expect
between our creators and us, even though they are 25,000 years ahead
of us. Their slow progression gives us the impression that we will be
able to accomplish the same things in much less time. How is that?
243

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

ANSWER:
In order to report what I have seen, I used words that people of
today can understand, while placing myself psychologically at the
level of the most numerous of those who live in technologically
developed countries. In fact, we cannot even begin to imagine the
capacity and the technological level of the Elohim. What we are
doing at the end of the 20th century of the Christian era would seem
miraculous to Europeans who lived only 100 years ago, as well as to
the Amazon Indians now living in their forests, but what our creators
can do would seem equally miraculous to our most advanced
scientists, if they were showing it to them. Normally, the Elohim will
not do it because they don’t want to place us in a state of
incomprehension that would inevitably lead to giving value back to
beliefs that generate primitive religions. In this way, the Elohim hope
that we will continue, above all, to seek to understand matter and the
forces which surround us, by ourselves.
In the same manner in which they appeared to me with flashing
lights and a sort of space suit so as not to disorientate me too much
at the beginning, while they are able to appear instantly at ground
level as they did at the meeting at Roc Plat, they could also show
humanity technological prowess that even the most imaginative
scientists could not understand by themselves.
They are capable of doing certain things with infinitely large
particles such as planets and even entire solar systems, which we still
find hard to do with infinitely small particles such as neutrons or
electrons. What I mean is that they are able to modify the movements
of planets within solar systems, and even displace some entire solar
systems. They are able to do all this by using waves which we are not
even aware of yet.
Let’s go back to what was written in the first two messages. We
must admit that between our present level of science on Earth and
the mastery of scientific re-creation allowing eternal life, for example,
there is a giant step that our scientists will take a long time to make,

244

FAQ - T HE E LOHIM ’ S S CIENTIFIC L EVEL

OF

D EVELOPMENT

even if it is not entirely inconceivable for the most open-minded of
them.

Neither God nor Soul, but
the Elohim and the Genetic Code
QUESTION:
It is written in the messages that there is no God since the universe,
being infinite in space, could have no centre, and there is no soul for
much the same reasons. But could it not be said that the Elohim
replace “God” in the minds of many Raelians, and that the possibility
of being re-created on the planet of the Eternals, replaces the idea of
a “soul”, allowing access to “paradise”?
ANSWER:
Yes, there is no “God”. The universe is infinite and therefore
cannot have a centre by definition because of it being infinite.
However, it is necessary to differentiate between those for whom
“God” is a concept meaning infinity, something eternal,
omnipresent, impalpable, and having no power over man and those
for whom “God” is a being with a white beard sitting on a cloud who
created humans in his image.
Since the beginning, there has been a conglomeration between two
concepts, between two totally different things, that were unjustly put
together under the same label. The Elohim explained to the first
humans that on the one hand, there is Infinity, which is omnipresent
and eternal and of which we are a part and which is part of us, and
on the other hand, themselves, the Elohim, who created us in their
image.

245

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Little by little the properties of the Infinite were affiliated to the
Elohim, and this is partly true because they are eternal; and to the
Infinite, the power of manifestation through Celestial Messengers, is
partly true again, because in a certain way, the Elohim could be
considered as the instrument of the Infinite in their creation of
intelligent beings in their image.
But the Infinite does not constantly watch over us directly and in
itself is not conscious of our individual behavior. Whether mankind
reaches the Golden Age or self-destructs is of no importance to the
Infinite, no more than us paying attention to the molecule of our
fingers which we leave on a fabric when we touch it. In relation to the
Infinite, it is quite normal that there would be a natural selection at
all levels, the same as for the man or the dog of which the Earth is but
an atom of its skull or finger nail, and the same for the sun which
illuminates it, or for the billions of inhabited planets that can be
found in our thumb-nail.
Those who think of “God” as Infinity, as most oriental religions
teach, are right, in as much as it represents a concept without identity,
and without consciousness of our own existence, or any other for that
matter.
Those for whom “God” is our creators, the Elohim, are not entirely
wrong either, so long as they do not think of them as beings who
must be worshiped on hands and knees or lying down with one’s face
in the dirt, but of elder brothers in the Infinite, whom we should love
as we wish to be loved by the beings that we will create one day.
The spirit is a concept, whose etymology we will trace so as to
better understand its meaning. The word spirit comes from the Latin
spirare which means “to breathe” and the word soul comes from the
same root as the French word souffle, also meaning “breath”. We can
analyze the exact composition of the human body, then mix together
all the chemical constituents, but we will not obtain a living being for
all that. Something will be missing, something which is needed to
assemble, to articulate, to organize it in a well defined plan. Take all
that is required to build the house of your dreams, such as 10 tons of
stones, a ton of cement, 100 kilos of paint, two wash basins, a bath,
246

FAQ - N EITHER G OD N OR S OUL , B UT T HE E LOHIM A ND T HE G ENETIC C ODE

etc., and put it all in a heap. Nevertheless, we would not obtain a
house because the most important thing is missing: the plan. The
creation of a person follows the same principle, there has to be a plan.
This plan is the genetic code, which means that by assembling a
minute quantity of matter to form the first cell containing a cellular
plan, we would consider that person is, in fact, nearly completed.
This first cell would use the matter we give it as food to multiply in
two, then four, then eight cells, and so on, following a precise plan
until all the information contained in the genetic specifications has
been met.
Each and every living being possesses a genetic code, which differs
according to the species, or depending on individuals belonging to
the same species, in certain details, such as the color of the eyes, the
hair, the character, etc. Even The Bible states clearly that each living
being possesses a “soul” and not only man:
24

But flesh with the soul thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall
ye not eat. And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at
the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man;
24
at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the soul of man.
Genesis 9: 4-5.
21

For the soul of the flesh is in the blood. Leviticus 17: 11

Therefore, there is no ethereal soul flying gracefully from the body
after death, but there is the genetic code, which is the personality of
each individual. It is through this genetic code that the Elohim
proceed to re-create those people whose life on Earth is worthy of
eternal life on their planet.
There is no “God”, but there are the Elohim, our creators who we
wish to welcome as they deserve to be welcomed, and in whom we
have faith, or rather trust. Also, there is no autonomous soul flying
from the body after death, but there is the genetic code which allows
access to eternal life.
247

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The Religion of the Infinite
QUESTION:
The Raelian Movement is an atheist religion whose goals are the
diffusion of the messages of demystification, given by the Elohim, to
the Earth’s population, and to build an embassy where they will make
official contact with the governments of the Earth. Supposing that
humanity showed proof of wisdom and succeeded in avoiding selfdestruction, that the messages would be diffused in every language,
that the embassy is built and that the Elohim arrive; what will be the
function of the Raelian religion then, and what will its mission be?
ANSWER:
If all that comes about, and I am of the opinion that it will, even
if there is only one chance in a hundred that man will choose the path
of wisdom, humanity’s religion will become that of the Elohim – the
Infinite. The mission of the Raelian Guides will then be the teaching
of the techniques allowing man to live in harmony with the Infinite.
These techniques are summarily explained in The Keys in the second
message and in Sensual Meditation. In other words, all of that which
enables man to raise his level of consciousness, to refine his
perception of the electro-chemical reactions and interchanges
produced in his brain.
The religion of the Infinite is the religion of the absolute, and it is
inevitably eternal. The mere fact that people, 25,000 years ahead of
us scientifically, are still faithful to this religion, is the proof that this
is the absolute religion, the eternal religion for all the living species
who have reached a universal level of consciousness, that is to say
Infinite.
The awakening sessions that we organize regularly constitute an
approach to this religion of the Infinite through sensual meditation.

248

FAQ - T HE F UTURE O F T RADITIONAL R ELIGIONS

The Future of Traditional Religions
QUESTION:
If the Elohim come to the embassy accompanied by Moses, Jesus,
Buddha, and Mohammed, and all the great prophets who live on the
planet of the Eternals, what will become of the existing religions?
ANSWER:
The majority would rally to the Raelian Movement, at least those
churchgoers who are faithful to the writings of these religions, and
who are sufficiently intelligent and open-minded enough to
understand. Unfortunately, a great number of narrow minded
fanatics, guided by the clergy of these religions afraid of losing their
source of revenue, will oppose the general rally. They will allege that
the Elohim are usurpers, or that they have been sent by “the devil”,
and facing their own Christ, they would joyfully crucify him again,
just as the clergy of the Inquisition would have burned Jesus as a
sorcerer in his own name if he had had the misfortune to fall into
their hands in that epoch.
I recently had the opportunity to have breakfast with one of the
representatives of the Jewish community in Montreal, Quebec.
During the meal, I asked him what he would do if Moses himself told
him to do otherwise than that which is written in The Old Testament.
He replied: ‘I would continue to apply that which is written in The
Bible.’
Many people are like him, and this is one of the problems with
which the Elohim are confronted as they seek recognition from
humanity. They will have to be stronger than the beliefs that they
have engendered.
If tomorrow the Elohim landed somewhere in the world and
explained to the governors who came to meet them, and to the
media, that “God” does not exist, nor the soul, and presented Jesus
in the flesh, saying who he is, do you believe that the Vatican would
249

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

place its fortune at his disposal? Certainly not, because the system has
taken the upper hand over the fundamental goals of the Catholic
Church.
All nuns are the wives of Jesus. Would they place themselves at his
service if he returned? To be the wives of someone who does not exist
materially, believing that he is alive somewhere, and being worried if
he really returned: that is the problem of the nuns.
As a great thinker once said: we cannot change the minds of
people, they simply die and are replaced by others more evolved who
have a different opinion. Time is on our side.
Certainly there will always be a small nucleus of narrow-minded
fanatics, but they will die out, the same as the pre-Christian religions
who martyred the first Christians, and whose beliefs have nevertheless
totally disappeared.
The problem only will arise if the Elohim arrive before the present
primitive beliefs have totally disappeared.

Raelism and Geniocracy
QUESTION:
You published a book entitled: Geniocracy, from which a political
movement was formed called: The Movement for Worldwide
Geniocracy. Are you not trying to use a religious movement to
impose a political doctrine?
ANSWER:
Many Raelians were particularly interested by the chapter in the
first message, which explained what the political organization was like
on the planet of the Elohim, and asked me to develop this idea in a
manifesto which would help them to create a political movement
following this ideology. The fact that the Elohim wanted us to favor
250

FAQ - R AELISM

AND

G ENIOCRACY

the implantation of geniocracy on Earth, and at the same time, leave
men free to understand something better if they could, prompted me
to agree to write this manifesto. Later, the few Raelians more
particularly interested in geniocracy, created the party in question,
and even presented a candidate at an election only a few months after
its creation.
My position is very clear in all the countries where geniocracy is
progressing. I am on Earth primarily to accomplish my mission,
which consists of spreading the messages of our creators and building
the embassy that they have requested. Those who are involved with
geniocracy know that I devote all my time to my mission, and that
even though I wish them the best of results, I do not feel concerned
with their problems. I have even asked all the Guides who have
started these political movements to find, as quickly as possible, other
non-Raelians capable of replacing them, so that the Guides in
question can devote themselves to that which, in my opinion, is more
important: their work as Guides.
If geniocratic candidates do seek to be elected, I will always advise
the Raelians to vote for them. It becomes quite evident that a person
can be a Raelian and a “Geniocrat”, just as one can be a Democrat
and a Christian; one can have a religion and a political opinion.
Raelians do not have to get involved with the Geniocratic party, in
fact, quite the contrary. I am convinced that people can do only one
thing at a time, at least very well, so I advise Raelians not to become
active in the Geniocratic party, but to leave that to non-Raelians.
When one works eight hours a day and spends all one’s free time
diffusing the messages, each free moment becomes precious. Not a
single minute should be wasted on a political movement when it
could be spent diffusing the messages. One must make a choice, and
a political ideology does not weigh very much when compared with
the messages of the Elohim. I have set the ball rolling with geniocracy,
and I am now counting on non-Raelians to run it. Perhaps it will
develop into something enormous which will save humanity, or
perhaps humanity will save itself without geniocracy, even if they
come to it later. The only important thing is that the embassy will
251

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

soon be built; this is my only concern, my only preoccupation, and it
should be the only concern and the only preoccupation of all true
Raelians. The priority of priorities is the building of the embassy for
our creators, so that we can welcome them in the company of the
ancient messengers: Moses, Jesus, Buddha, and Mohammed. This is
my only reason for being on this Earth. This must become the only
reason for living for all those people who wish to help me.

Who Created the Creator of the Creators?
QUESTION:
The Elohim created us, and other people from another planet
created them. Who created the creators of the Elohim?
ANSWER:
The Infinite in space is easier for man to understand than the
Infinite in time.
Once we have attained sufficient open-mindedness, we can
understand that in space the Earth is but a particle of the atom of the
atoms of the hand of a gigantic being, who contemplates a starlit sky
which composes the hand, the stomach or the foot of a being even
more gigantic, who finds himself under a sky, etc., etc., ad infinitum.
The same process applies for the infinitely small. On the atom of the
atoms of our hands, there exist intelligent beings for whom these
particles are planets and stars, and these beings are composed of
atoms of which the particles are the stars and the planets on which
there are intelligent beings, etc., etc., also to infinity.
Infinity in time becomes more difficult for Man to understand
because Man is born one day, he lives a certain number of years and
dies, but he would like everything in the universe to be limited in
time as he is. For the man who is not awakened, the idea that
252

FAQ - W HO C REATED T HE C REATOR O F T HE C REATORS ?

anything in the universe could be eternal is unbearable, even if this
were the universe itself. Our present day scientists abide by the same
rule and say the universe must measure so many kilometers and must
be so many millions of years old. Whether in space or in time, we can
only measure the part of the universe that we can sense.
Everything is eternal, be it in the form of matter or energy, and we
ourselves are composed of eternal matter.
The Elohim were created by people from another planet, who had
been created by other people coming from another planet, and so on
to Infinity.
It is as foolish to search for the beginning of the universe in time
as it is to search for the beginning of space.
Let us get back to the example where intelligent beings are living
on the particle of one of the atoms of our hand and for whom this
particle is a planet. In relation to space, the scientists on this
microscopic planet located, for example, in the middle of the bone
marrow of the first phalanx of our right index finger, these scientists
will at first claim that the other particles that they can observe with
the naked eye revolve around the centre of their world, their planet,
the particle on which they are located. For these scientists, it is
obvious that their planet is the centre of the universe. But they will
progress, and one day a genius will prove that their sun does not
revolve around their planet, and that the stars also do not revolve
around their little world, but rather it is their planet that turns on
itself in a near motionless sky, as well as turning around their sun at
the same time. He will probably be burnt for his heretical theories by
the inquisitorial witch-hunters of their “particle planet”, but a day
will come when people, having discovered more sophisticated
instruments of observation, will prove that he was right.
Then the learned scientists of that period will proceed to measure
the universe, in all modesty, saying that it stretches from the farthest
star particle located at one end of the sky to the farthest star particle
located at the other end. This measurement will represent only one
billionth of a billionth of the area of our finger where they happen to
253

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

be located. But, since they cannot see any further, they will assume
that the universe stops where they can no longer observe.
But the observation techniques will progress even more, and they
will start to perceive that there are other galaxies and clusters of
galaxies. Be that as it may, it will prove only that the universe is
greater than had been anticipated, and it will always measure so many
thousand kilometers or light-years, a little more than before, 10 or
100 times more eventually, nevertheless, it will always measure
something. We have reached this point in our progression on Earth.
But let us get back to the planet located on our finger.
Science is always progressing, and the inhabitants of our phalanx
are now at the level to launch always more audacious space explorations. They finally reach a new frontier, the bone of which their
planet is but an atom of an atom. This way they can be sure that the
universe measures so much by so much. The proof is that, after that
point, there is nothing more to be observed.
A little later they succeed in crossing the immensity which
separates the bone from the muscle, and their universe gains new
dimensions again.
They improve their space-ships and finally reach the layer of skin
which covers our finger. They have reached the end of their universe,
which measures one-and-a-half centimeters by our scale, but was
many light-years for them.
They will still be able, however, to pursue their space explorations
inside the rest of our body. They will follow certain currents where
the stars are moving mysteriously at very high speeds - gigantic
corridors, which they will chart to permit them to come and go freely
from their planet, but little will they know that they are travelling in
our blood vessels. Their universe will be measured, demarcated. It
will have a particular height, width and depth. An incredible number
of light-years on their scale but only 1.75 meters for us. They will not
yet have discovered that our feet, for example, are standing on a
planet which for them is itself made up of a great number of galaxies,
which their narrow minds, always wanting to place frontiers
everywhere, cannot even begin to imagine and grasp. For the quantity
254

FAQ - W HO C REATED T HE C REATOR O F T HE C REATORS ?

of atoms contained within the Earth is immeasurable compared with
the number within our body.
They would also have to become conscious that there are other
“universe-men” like us, who are walking on this planet, and that in
our sky there are other stars and other galaxies, and so on to Infinity.
Only some of the wisest of them, having reached a superior level of
consciousness allowing them to be in tune with the universe, will thus
be able to teach all this to their disciples at a time where, for the official
scientists, their universe measured only a millionth of a millionth of
a millimeter of the bone of our finger, which they could observe, only
from the inside...
The concept of Infinity in time is the very same thing. The
scientists of that mini-world could measure the age of their universe
by measuring the age of the molecule of which their planet is but an
atom of an atom, and the universe would have that age. Then they
would realize that the age of the cell of which the molecule that they
thought to be the “total universe”, while it was, in fact, only a part, is
much greater. Then they would discover that the limb, of which this
cell is but a part, is much older still, and that the age of the being of
which this member is but a part, is even greater, and so on to infinity.

What is the Purpose of Life?
QUESTION:
What is the purpose of life?
ANSWER:
As stated in the messages, everything must be estimated in relation
to four levels. Our life means nothing when compared with the
Infinite. If we die, if all of humanity disappears, it will not change
anything in the Infinity of time or space. The gigantic being of whom
255

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

we are a parasite of a particle of an atom, will continue to exist
without noticing anything, and the whole of the history of mankind
since its creation will have only lasted a billionth of a second for him.
The living beings on the atoms of the atoms of our hand will
continue to exist as if nothing had happened, even if the atom on
which their universe is located, is buried deep in the Earth in the flow
of blood coming from our finger torn away by an explosion, for
example. Even if this drop of blood is swallowed by a worm that
retains the atom in which their universe is located, to constitute new
cells for its growth, this will not affect the living beings on this little
world, any more than it would affect the beings living on the atoms
which make up the cells of their own fingers...
In relation to the Elohim, our life is very important, because we are
their children, and we must show them that we are proud of having
been privileged enough to have been created in their image. That is
to say, able to become conscious of the Infinite, and also one day able
to create people in our own image in return.
In relation to human society, our life is equally very important,
because we are the result of a long list of survivors who have escaped
the epidemics and wars which have made us the offspring of a long
natural selection. We owe it to ourselves to participate actively in the
plan that will allow humanity to reach the Golden Age, which it
greatly deserves and which it is about to enter. We are the cells of this
huge being that is Humanity, and at the time of the birth of this
humanity, each cell, each one of us is very important, in that he or
she has a role to play.
Finally, in relation to our own self, our life has only the importance
that we give it. If we recognize the Elohim as our creators, and if we
wish to contribute to the diffusion of the messages, so that they will
be known all over the Earth so that mankind enters the Golden Age,
and if we enjoy our participation in this gigantic endeavor, then we
are enjoying life for that reason.
The question was, ‘what is the purpose of life?’ Life was made to
be enjoyed, whether you find pleasure in the diffusion of the messages
of our creators, or pleasure in contributing to the entry of Humanity
256

FAQ - W HAT I S T HE P URPOSE O F L IFE ?

into the Golden Age, or pleasure in pleasing yourself by putting
yourself in tune with the Infinite, or by any other means.

What is Pleasure?
QUESTION:
What is pleasure?
ANSWER:
Pleasure is the reaction of an organism which has accomplished an
act producing pleasant chemical reactions.
A baby experiences pleasure while suckling its mother’s breast
because its hunger is appeased, and because the chemical reaction
produced by the milk on the papilla of the tongue produces a
pleasant sensation. All our senses are there to give us pleasure, and
Sensual Meditation is based on an improvement of the perception of
pleasure provoked by the chemical reactions transmitted by our
senses.
Everything we do during our life, we do because it gives us
pleasure. There is not one action performed during our entire life
which is not done for pleasure. The person who pays his income tax
does it because it pleases him not to have to go to jail for not having
paid it. The woman who throws herself under the wheels of a car to
save her child, does it because it pleases her to see her child survive,
even if it means being wounded in the process. And the soldier who
throws himself under enemy fire in order to save his battalion, does
so because it pleases him to die for his comrades. The suicide pilots
of Japan are the ultimate example of this type of heroism – pleasure.
There is a difference between direct pleasures, such as immediate
sensual satisfaction, and indirect pleasures, such as the choice of
behavior, which we spoke of earlier, and which are a reaction to
257

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

exterior interventions without resulting in a conscious development
of our means of perception of the environment.
It is only when conscious pleasure is obtained in solitude in an
attempt to improve the quality of one’s perception, that true
blossoming can take place. We are linked to the Infinite through our
senses. Someone who cannot see, hear, smell, touch, or taste, would
actually be dead, even if his heart was still beating. He would not be
conscious of his environment and would therefore possess no
intelligence.
It is important to note that those who are deprived of one sense
develop the remaining senses to a much greater extent than people
with all their senses. Blind people, for example, develop an acute
sense of hearing that we cannot grasp, or can read with their fingertips.
Scientific experiments have demonstrated that the pleasure centre
is located within the brain. This was discovered by placing electrodes
in that part of the brain and sending small electrical discharges. The
people who were experimented on felt something which was close to
an orgasm, the satisfaction of having made a new discovery and the
feeling of being honorably quoted in public all in one go. It was then
proven by complementary measures that it was this same pleasure
centre which was activated, when one was reaching sexual orgasm, or
when discovering something, or when an artist had finished a
masterpiece, or when a soldier received a medal.
Better still, another experiment demonstrated that artists who were
sexually aroused while creating noticed an increase in their potential
of creativity.
Nothing could be more logical. Pleasure increases the potential of
creativity, because it stimulates all our senses, and a creator must be
linked to Infinity in order to have a harmonious masterpiece born.
We must then strive towards improving the quality of our
perception of pleasure by increasing the sensitivity of all our senses.
As a direct result, other than the increased enjoyment, this increase
in sensitivity will develop our total potential of creativity so that the
258

FAQ - W HAT I S P LEASURE ?

rest of humanity may benefit from our creations, thus improving the
general level of consciousness.
This is what is being taught at the courses of awakening that we
organize for the Raelians.
By improving the level of individual consciousness, we improve the
level of consciousness of Humanity, and so increase the chances of
entering the Golden Age.
In order to change society, we must first change the individuals of
which it is composed. Violence is always produced by those who are
unhappy.
By improving the individual’s happiness, we help to lessen the
potential for violence. Moreover and quite often, violence is
produced by individuals who believe that they are unhappy, and the
art of politicians is to strengthen this belief so as to overthrow those
in power, to take their place. Then the former use the same tactics to
reach the same goals, thus maintaining a feeling of dissatisfaction,
which could one day, through the amplification of successive
overthrows, result in the general feeling that the cause of the
dissatisfaction is in another country. This is how wars are started.
If each individual becomes conscious of the Infinite, by developing
his own sensuality, then the whole of society will be transformed.
This will start by the awakening of the consciousness of people more
developed than others, who once they have attained a certain level,
will become Guides for the people around them, and will allow
others to become fully awakened, who will in turn awaken others,
and so on. Thus gradually, the level of consciousness of Humanity
will be raised to such a point that a fatal world conflict would become
impossible.
The process has already started, and thousands of small, nonviolent manifestations have taken place around the world, organized
by students or intellectuals in favor of peace, of unilateral
disarmament of such-or-such a country, and it is amplified by
television, the central nervous system of Humanity.
Each individual contributes at each moment of his life to the
awakening or the stifling of planetary consciousness. You must not be
259

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

afraid to influence others, as we are here for that purpose. But we
should direct all our efforts and every word that we say, at every
moment, so that all we say and every action we do has a positive
influence on the course of human history.
One must never seek to convince others, because people who
perceive that we are trying to convince them, have a tendency to
strengthen their position. Whereas, if one discovers a point in
common with the other’s philosophy, then one can concentrate on
this common point, and from there, unveil a new path for our
listener, so that he will have the impression of having found it out by
himself.
It is foolish to say that we will not influence anyone else by
stubbornly following our own way and letting others follow theirs.
The mere fact of not trying to influence others influences them even
more than if one takes a fanatical stand on something. People fear
fanaticism more and more, whatever the subject, and they are right to
do so. This is in fact the beginning of wisdom.
On Earth, there are people who seek the truth and show it, and
others who seek the truth and hide it, but there is not one single
person who does not seek it. Then there are people who pretend that
they have found the truth and show it, too often concerned with
maintaining traditions, and last there are people who have found the
real truth and show it: the Raelians.
We are very interested in those people who seek the truth and show
it, because it shows that they are sincere and open-minded, generally
very intelligent and relatively harmonious. In any case, for the most
part, they are ready to accept a new vision of the world without
fearing that this change will traumatize them to the point of
unbalancing them. These people represent a great majority of
present-day Raelians; they are the pioneers.
Those people who seek the truth and hide it, are also very
important to us, but they will be more than likely to join us when
they have overcome their self-consciousness, and no longer worry
what other people think of them.
260

FAQ - W HAT I S P LEASURE ?

Those people who pretend that they have found the truth, and
show it, will come to us when it becomes evident that nothing is
constant in the universe, and therefore it is nonsense to try to preserve
traditions that no longer mean anything. They just love their
traditions but could not care less about what “God” really is.
All of these people do this for pleasure. The latter get pleasure in
thinking that their children will pray in exactly the same way as they
have, and that their children will teach their own children the very
same ways of praying, even though school will teach them that man
is descended from the monkey. So what if it is wrong? What is
important to them is for the teaching at school to be respected, yet
also for what the priest says to be respected. The fact that they are
both contradictory is neither here nor there, what is important is that
they are both traditions, and according to these lovers of tradition, it
is not up to us to question which one is right.
Christians would surely crucify Jesus a second time if he himself
were to ask them not to go to church on Sunday, or not to baptize
their children before they had reached adulthood. This is the position
adopted by the worshippers of tradition.
Those people who seek the truth and hide it, feel pleasure in
thinking that what people think they are is more important than
what they truly are. Those people would not crucify Jesus, they would
even be against it, but they would still not intervene or even say
anything. They do not want to get involved in anything, not even if
it means defending what they believe to be the truth.
When all of Humanity enjoys its sensuality to the full, the risk of
a world conflict will have disappeared. At the root of all violence,
there are always sensually dissatisfied people. This is why we must
learn to enjoy all of our senses, and help everyone around us to
discover their total sensuality, starting with children. It is not
sufficient to show them “how it works”, like sexual education tends
to do, but we must teach them “how to use it” so as to obtain and
give more pleasure.
Sexual education should be replaced by sensual education.
261

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Pleasure is always fulfilling, direct pleasure that is, and not the
pleasure of the soldier who dies for his comrades. Direct pleasure
develops in each individual the means to become in tune with the
Infinite, and really feel a part of the Infinite.
Our body is nothing more than an accumulation of atoms
organized according to a master plan, the genetic code, which
interacts with the environment through an infinity of chemical
reactions of which we are not always aware. Raising our level of
consciousness corresponds to feeling an even greater number of these
chemical reactions, so as to better situate ourselves in the Infinite, and
so as to become more harmonious. When we feel linked to the
universe, eternal and Infinite, we can never be unhappy, because we
have then discovered the pleasure of being.

What is Death?
QUESTION:
What is death?
ANSWER:
Death in relation to the Infinite means nothing. The matter of
which we are composed is eternal. Therefore, we are made of eternity.
The infinitely small particles which compose our nose existed before
they became part of us. Some of these particles were contained in the
steak that our mother ate while we were in the womb, and those
particles passed through her body and became part of our face. Other
particles were in the fruit that we ate yesterday, they came into our
abdomen and then travelled through our bloodstream to land on our
nose. This is true for every part of our body. After death, the reaction
will be exactly the same. The particles will return to the Earth to be
recycled, and some particles will land in animals, others in plants, but
262

FAQ - W HAT I S D EATH ?

most of them will remain in the Earth ‘for you are dust and you will
return to dust.’
Death, however, is the final cataclysm for the mass formed by this
accumulation of organized matter, which makes up what we are.
Death is the beginning of the process of dispersion of the matter of
which we are composed.
But to understand death, one must truly understand what life is all
about. Life is nothing other than the organization of the unorganized.
The Elohim came on Earth at a time when life did not exist. There
existed only unorganized matter at our level - what we call the
biological level.
They took this matter, they “kneaded” it, as stated in The Bible,
and they “shaped” it to create living beings. This was all done at the
molecular level, but for primitive man, this was impossible to
understand, so they related it to pottery. They believed that the
creators took a little piece of clay and created Man like you would do
a flower pot. It is true that the creators did take chemical components
from the Earth, but they combined them scientifically in such a way
that the inanimate became animated.
Every living thing on Earth has been created by the Elohim,
starting from a basic “brick”, a molecular structure composed of
atoms judiciously assembled. Our scientists are starting to discover
that all living things, animal or vegetable, man or beast, have similar
basic components. It’s like a sort of alphabet, where every letter is an
atom which makes up the genetic code of each living species. The
order in which the letters are placed may differ with each species, but
the letters of the alphabet would always remain the same. So with one
relatively simple “brick”, our creators were able to make an enormous
quantity of “houses” that differed in their appearance, but which were
all identical in their basic components. When the species reproduce,
they are doing no more than “reproducing” the genetic code of the
first model of their species.
So then, life is the organization of the unorganized, and death is
disorganization of the organized.
263

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Life is like a house that would build itself, by itself, starting from
its own plan, and furthermore, it would maintain itself automatically.
Death is the end of this automatic maintenance and the beginning of
the dispersion of the basic materials of which the house is made,
finally ending in the destruction of the plan which it had contained.
The Great Architects of our universe who have designed the plans
of these “houses” designed a type which would be capable one day of
matching its creators and becoming architects themselves, by creating
other plans able to build “houses” which build themselves, by
themselves. This type of superior “house” is Man, who will soon be
able to create new synthetic genetic codes, new plans, starting from
inanimate matter.
The living being was created with the ability of situating himself in
his own environment through his “perception feelers”, his senses.
Humans are nothing more than self-programming, selfreproducing biological computers.
There is no difference between humans and highly sophisticated
biological computers, such as those we are now able to produce, only
our computers are far more perfected and can perform far more
accurately than a human.
The computers can be equipped with means enabling them to
situate themselves in their own environment. Recently, a computer
was equipped with wheels enabling it to move by itself around
obstacles, thanks to TV cameras wired to its “brain”. It can “see”
exactly as we can with our eyes, and it can move in its environment.
A computer only does what it has been programmed for, and so
does Man; but let us continue our comparison between Man and the
computer.
As far as hearing is concerned, it is easy to endow a computer with
a microphone that will pick up noise as we do with our ears.
It is also possible to give it an analyzer, which will identify the
perfumes that surround it, just as we do with our nose.
Then it is also possible to give it a taste analyzer that would
indicate the taste of various substances as we do with our mouth.
264

FAQ - W HAT I S D EATH ?

Finally, it is possible to equip the computer with feelers capable of
functions that we perform with our hands, such as measuring
temperature, hardness and weight.
Better still, the computer can be equipped with “organs” infinitely
superior to our human organs. Let us take sight, for example. The
cameras used on the computer can be equipped with multiple lenses,
including a zoom lens, which will enable it to see clearly what is going
on many kilometers away, or a microscopic object; things that the
human eye is unable to see unless equipped with artificial prostheses
such as binoculars or microscopes.
The same thing applies to the sense of hearing. While we can only
perceive the sounds that exist around us in a very narrow range,
certain animals, like dogs, can perceive a wider range. So our
computer can be equipped with receptors sensitive to ultra-sounds or
infra-sounds and directional microphones allowing it to hear sounds
that are many kilometers away at a precise location.
Getting back to sight, the cameras could be equipped to pick up
ultraviolet or infrared rays enabling it to see at night, something we
are not capable of doing with our limited vision.
And as for the sense of smell, the odor analyzer could identify
odors and instantly transmit the chemical composition of the
perfumes or surrounding gases, something which our nose could
never do.
For the sense of taste, we could also equip it with flavor analyzers
capable of making a detailed chemical analysis of any given substance.
Finally, for the sense of touch, we could give it feelers, a touch
mechanism able to analyze with precision the temperature, the
weight and the hardness of objects or substances, other than saying
it’s hot or it’s heavy. It would also be able to manipulate things at
temperatures that our skin could not endure, things weighing a
thousand times more than our poor human muscles could lift.
We could go even further and equip our computer with senses that
man does not possess or that he is unable to make use of. We could,
for example, give it radar, permitting it to move in complete darkness,
a sonar, an x-ray detector, a compass, a gravity detector, a radio
265

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

communication system, so many senses that our body is not provided
with, and that we cannot even perceive, except with the use of
electronic prosthesis that we can rarely have altogether in the same
place and at any given time.
Let us compare the energy requirements of the human computer
and the machine. When a man needs energy, he says, ‘I am hungry’,
looks for food and eats it. Scientists have recently completed a
computer equipped with electrical batteries. It works, and its cameras
enable it to move and to store and move about heavy boxes just like
a fork-lift truck. Suddenly, the battery charge becomes too weak, and
it loses its efficiency. Its energy indicator shows that the time has
come to charge the batteries. Then, by itself, it will move to an
electrical outlet, plug itself in, and wait patiently until the charge is
sufficient, then disconnect itself and return to work. This is no
different from the man who says ‘I am hungry’ and proceeds to the
cafeteria to get food at mealtimes and then returns to work.
What happens when a man is injured? He stops working, he gets
medical attention, then returns to work. A computer can be
programmed for self-maintenance, just as it was programmed to feed
itself. If one of its parts becomes defective, it will go to a workshop,
remove the part and replace it with a new one, and this is done
without human help. This computer will then become eternal and
will never be faced, as man is, with the issue of death.
Man is able to reproduce himself, and so is the computer. It only
needs to be programmed accordingly. If a computer is programmed
to make replicas of itself, which have the ability to do the very same
thing, then in a very short time, we will have an overgrowing
population of computers. This is why they must not be programmed
to reproduce; for humans, this is called the species conservation
instinct, the unconscious desire to reproduce. Humans find pleasure
in copulating, unaware that they are in fact responding to an impulse,
the species conservation instinct. If there was no pleasure in
copulating, then there would be no reproduction. The human genetic
code was programmed so that pleasure is obtained through
copulation, in order for reproduction to take place. The humans who
266

FAQ - W HAT I S D EATH ?

use a contraceptive method, such as the pill, the cap or the condom,
etc., make a fantastic “nose-thumbing” to their genetic code. They
consciously take pleasure without it leading to reproduction. Pleasure
always brings an expansion of the mind, but overpopulation is
certainly a serious danger for Humanity; contraception is a
magnificent way that humans have of showing that they are
conscious of themselves and conscious of the importance of their
actions in regard to the whole of humanity.
Let us get back to our computer; it could also be programmed to
feel pleasure in doing certain things. Every computer which performs
as it has been programmed to perform, experiences pleasure from its
performance. When the computer “feels” that its energy level is low,
it says, ‘this is wrong’, then runs over to recharge. When it feels the
new energy running through its circuits, it can say ‘this is good’ and
in doing so ‘feels pleasure’.
What goes into the program of a computer? Information contained
in a memory bank that will rule the behavior of the computer. If it is
programmed to calculate, it will calculate; if it is programmed to
draw, it will draw; if is programmed to play music, it will play music.
But it will not play music if it has been programmed to calculate and
vice versa, unless of course it has been programmed for both
functions.
How is a human programmed? On the one hand, there is the
genetic code, which is filled with information related to his behavior,
to his sensual means, which enable him to communicate with his
environment, to his physical means so that he can move, feed himself,
reproduce, etc. This is what each human receives at birth (more or
less in relation to his heredity), and which constitutes the innate. On
the other hand, his education will provide him with a language so
that he can communicate with his fellow humans, laws which will
regulate his behavior, a set of “moral values”, a teaching, a concept of
the world, a religion, etc. All these things will determine the
individual’s behavior. The individual will be under the impression
that he is performing on his own, of living in a world where his values
are those which he has chosen, but they will be only those which his
267

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

education has imposed upon him, those ideas received from people
who have played the role of educator or programmer. This is called
experience.
Ordinary people, unconscious people, are incapable of doing
anything other than that which they have been programmed for by
their genetics or by their experience, by their heredity and by their
educators. The “total man”, the man who raises his level of
consciousness so as to situate himself in the infinity of space and
time, becomes a self-programmable computer. He can question the
program which has been imposed on him by his education without
asking advice, and replace his total or partial education with a new
and more appropriate set of values that will seem better, in relation to
higher standards, than those antiquated ones which had motivated
his family and his environment. Those standards were aimed
generally at conditioning him to keep alive the traditions of the past,
of times when men were totally primitive, with a low level of
consciousness in their conception of the world, and the role that
humans had been created to play in it.
An ordinary man who wishes to become a “total man”, a man with
a higher level of consciousness which would enable him to exploit a
little more than 10 per cent of his brain – percentage used by
ordinary men and partial men – must be able to do his own in-depth
“brain-washing”. This operation will enable him to look at everything
in his brain, to put back what seems to be good and to disregard what
seems to be bad. He will keep his own ideas and get rid of the ones
he received either from other people, his family, or his environment,
ideas which he has received from those people who wanted to model
him after their own conventions and for their own convenience. This
applies to his behavior, his reactions to world events, the way he
awakens, gets up, gets dressed, works, speaks to others and listens to
them, the blossoming of his sexual life, etc. - everything, each gesture,
no matter how small or insignificant it may seem. A total man is
conscious of each movement of his eyebrows and the effect it could
have on the people surrounding him.
268

FAQ - W HAT I S D EATH ?

Quite obviously, this great “spring cleaning” in order to be
efficient, must be done in the company of someone who has already
crossed the line which separates “ordinary men” from the infinite
universe of “total man”, someone who knows all the different paths,
and who is able to lead this new traveller in the proper direction, and
to guide without forcing him, letting him choose his own path freely.
A man’s consciousness is a house which has been built usually by
other people, based on standards which have never been questioned,
since the same thing had been done to them and to their parents
before them. The total man will destroy this house and build a new
one, adapted to his taste, and to his imagination. He will recover
from the old ruins certain things which seem reusable, and
combining them with the new components, he will build a new
house, perfectly suitable to his new personality. Men have houses
built in conformity to their level of consciousness. Houses have
always been square or rectangular, with slanted roof tops, and
nothing could change that. They keep building the same type of
house over and over again. Every house is like a Greek temple with
vertical walls, like pillars, and a slanted rooftop, like a pyramid sitting
on top of the Greek pillars. Modern construction techniques allow
for more personalization when building a house. For instance, it
could be completely round, it could have the shape of a ball, or an
egg, or an Egyptian pyramid, or a bird, or a tree, etc. Houses which
are built in series all looking exactly the same and forming morbid
looking uniform villages, are the exact reflection of the level of
consciousness of their inhabitants. And yet paradoxically, the house is
a typical example of Man’s capacity for self-programming. The
blackbird has always built his nest in the same way, and it cannot
change that because this is programmed into its genetic code. Man,
however, is capable of adapting his shelter to his environment. He can
build Greek temples, pyramids, huts, igloos, wooden cottages,
skyscrapers made of iron and cement, cathedrals made of stone, and
towers made of metal or glass.
The mere fact that Man is a self-programming computer does not
make him different from the machine. All computers can be
269

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

programmed to do the same as we do, and like us, they could be
programmed to reproduce themselves. It could be also possible to
program a computer so that it could be self-programming. It would
be able to live, to work, to reproduce itself from a basic program,
based on its experiences, and to give this information to its
descendants, to the computers that it would reproduce.
We could even imagine a “mind expanding” computer which
would have the ability to awaken the programs of already existing
computers which had been created as non self-programming, so that
this feature would be transmitted to them...
Man is therefore starting to discover, through the machine, that
there is nothing mysterious about himself nor his origins, nor his
behavior. Everything that a man can do, a computer can do, and what
is more, it can do it much better. This applies to everything that can
be done by a human, and it includes artistic creativity. There are
computers capable of composing music, of drawing and so on.
We could never find a human ability that cannot be programmed
in a computer, even getting in tune with the Infinite could be
programmed. All of this is simply fantastic, and Man is able to look
upon himself as a wonderful machine and concentrate wholeheartedly on seeking happiness and total blossoming through the
fulfillment of his own needs and that of his fellow men, in order to
build a world in which all men will be happy to feel that they are
infinite and eternal.

Sexual Freedom and No Obligation
QUESTION:
The message mentioned total sexual freedom. But for a couple who
read the books and wish to become Raelians, does it become
mandatory to practice the exchange of partners?
270

FAQ - S EXUAL F REEDOM

AND

N O O BLIGATION

ANSWER:
Freedom to do something and obligation are two different things,
which must not be confused. A Raelian couple who love each other
deeply, where both partners do not wish to share a sexual experience
with other couples, should stay together. If they feel happy being with
each other without the need to experience anything else, that is just
fine. Everyone must do as he or she pleases. Sexual freedom of
choosing a single partner, once you have discovered who you really
are, and once you have discovered a partner who fills your every need
and whose every need you seem to fill, becomes a question of choice
to live together. However, quite often an experience with another
person will render you more appreciative of your partner’s company,
as you become more conscious of his or her qualities. In so far as
sexual contacts are concerned, everything is possible, everything is
permitted. I must insist on the word permitted for it does not mean
mandatory.
Since the creation of the Raelian Movement, I have had the
opportunity to see many couples start new relationships. Some of
these seem to be so successful that I can very well see what they hope
to gain in seeing other partners. Perhaps these experiences would only
confirm that they are truly made for each other. Some people are
sufficiently awakened to understand that the experience in itself is
not really necessary. When a man is totally conscious, he does not
need to do something to find out what the result is going to be, he
knows it, he can feel it, unless the experience is aimed at the
awakening of a disciple, or it is felt essential to his own personal
progression. Each person is free to follow his own chosen path so long
as the following three fundamental rules are observed:
Respect the tastes and decisions of others in the free choice of their
partners; be permanently conscious that others do not belong to us
and that nobody can be the owner of anybody; and always seek above
anything else, the happiness of those we claim to love.

271

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

On this basis, everything is possible, couples, threesomes,
foursomes and “more-somes” of Raelians living a perfect happiness,
whether they be homosexuals, heterosexuals, or bisexuals.

Raelism and Homosexuality
QUESTION:
What is the position of the Raelian Movement on homosexuality?
ANSWER:
It is quite simple: each individual has the right to do with his or
her body as he or she sees fit. Homosexuality is not a normal or
abnormal mode of behavior. Each person must live an harmonious
sexual life corresponding to tastes and natural tendencies. In the
mother’s womb the sexual differentiation is felt at a very late stage of
development. There are very masculine men, and men who are more
feminine, just as there are women who are virile and others who are
very feminine, with all the possible and imaginable shades in
between.
It is foolish to condemn a homosexual because he is a homosexual,
just as it would be foolish to condemn a man because he is a man, or
a cat because it is a cat, as all of this is genetic. Many types of animals
are homosexual, and in the country one can see frequently, dogs,
cattle, and chickens indulging in homosexual behavior.
Homosexuality is as natural as a dog or a hen is natural.
What is not natural is the wish to obligate others to have the same
sexuality as oneself. It is generally what those who torture people who
do not resemble them are doing. They are generally the same as those
who are racist, traditionalist and militarist.

272

FAQ - R AELISM A ND H OMOSEXUALITY

The aggression aimed at homosexual people is a form of racism. It
usually comes from people who lead a miserable sex life, and cannot
tolerate that others could blossom while living something else.
These same people who condemn homosexuality will forgive very
easily a man charged with raping a woman, even though it is an
abominable crime. Among the Raelian Guides there are male and
female homosexuals, there are heterosexuals and bisexuals. All of
them are blossoming because they are conscious of being loved as
they are with the opportunity to fulfill themselves living in their body
as they please, in a fraternal communion of thought that no other
religion is able to give them. How can one still be a Roman Catholic
follower when one hears the “Vatican Usurper” condemn
homosexuality while depriving women of their rights of becoming
priests. These are two proofs of racism and sexism that can help those
who have eyes to see the truth.

Deists and Evolutionists: The False Prophets
QUESTION:
It is written, ‘When the age of the Apocalypse will arrive, there will
be many false prophets.’ Who are they?
ANSWER:
There are many false prophets in our day and age. Do not forget
the meaning of the word prophet, its etymology. It means “the one
who reveals”, as we have stated earlier. The false prophets of our time,
that is to say, those who reveal or teach false information, are all those
people who try to bring humanity back to primitive beliefs in an
immaterial and impalpable, yet almighty “God” who watches over
each human being to either punish or reward him, as the case may be.
It is a concept which mixes the infinite, which is indeed impalpable
273

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

in its totality because of it being infinite in space and eternal in time
- yet without any consciousness of its own and thus with no power
over humanity as a whole, nor over any single person, for that matter
– and the Elohim who are our creators, who are real and almighty in
this sector of the infinite, but who love us, their children, and who
allow us to evolve freely in our scientific and spiritual progression.
The second category of contemporary false prophets are all those
people, scientists or not, who claim that life on Earth, and therefore
Humanity, is the result of successive random chance events, which all
happened during what they call “evolution”. As Einstein said, there
cannot be a watch without a watchmaker. All those people who
believe that we came from the monkey through a slow evolutionary
process, believe that the beautiful watch which we are, has built itself
by accident. It is a bit like saying that if we put all the components of
a watch together in a bag and shook it around for a while, we would
eventually get a perfect working watch. Try a billion times if you so
desire...
The evolutionists are also false prophets, false informers, people
who lead the majority of the population away from the truth about
our creators, the Elohim. This population, which easily swallows and
dumbly believes in everything said by these narrow-minded high
priests in white coats - who compose the majority of the scientific
community - is purposely kept ignorant and so inevitably believes
that which officialdom says is true. Can you begin to imagine what
the Elohim feel when they see that humans attribute their
masterpiece to random chance?

274

FAQ - S UICIDE

Suicide
QUESTION:
It is said in the second message that one who suffers too much pain
has the right to commit suicide. Does it mean that suicide is a good
thing?
ANSWER:
We will all be judged according to our actions while living on this
Earth. The person with more positive than negative actions will be
entitled to eternal life on the planet of the Elohim. If a person suffers
too much physically, and if human science is unable to relieve his
pain, then he has a right to put an end to his life. If most of his
actions in his life were positive, he will be re-created to live eternally.
If they were mainly negative, he will not be re-created, and for him
there will be nothing. However, if most of his actions were negative,
he could be re-created to be judged later by those same people whom
he made to suffer.
Someone who is not physically suffering, or who has no handicap,
must not commit suicide, as we all have a mission to accomplish on
this Earth, especially Raelians. They must dedicate their lives to the
diffusion of the messages given by the Elohim, of whom they are the
spokes-people. To end one’s life is like an act of treason, it’s like
running from one’s post during combat. I am referring to the combat
which will awaken humanity and allow it to survive in order to reach
the Golden Age. The Elohim are counting on each one of us, and
each Raelian is very precious to our creators.
Allow me to repeat myself: the only time when suicide is acceptable
is when a person is in extreme physical pain, which cannot be relieved
by science, or when his faculties have diminished to the point where
he can no longer act effectively.
All other people are messengers of our Fathers who are in the sky,
and we must all dedicate our lives to the spreading of the good news.
275

2
THE NEW REVELATIONS

T

his chapter contains revelations that the Elohim had asked Rael
to keep secret until three years after his journey when the second
message was revealed to him. Now that we are in the year 34 (1979),
these things can be known to all.

The Devil Does Not Exist, I Met Him
Do not tremble when wondering if a creature with horns, with cloven
feet, well hidden, waits for the right moment to come and prick your
backside with a trident. Since there is no “God” sitting on a white
cloud, holding a flash of lightning in his right hand, the devil does
not exist either.
For the average person, Devil, Satan, Lucifer or Demon are different
names attributed to a single person who is one and the same, and
personifies the forces of evil, just as they would think of “Apocalypse”
as meaning “the end of the world”.
Let us trace the true meaning of these words. Satan is chronologically the most ancient. When the Elohim created the first
completely synthetic living beings in the laboratories on their original
planet, a certain group of people from their world protested against
these genetic manipulations, which they thought were dangerous for
their civilization. They were afraid that one day the scientists would
create monsters that would escape from the laboratories and would
commit murders within the population. Unfortunately, we know that
276

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

this is what happened, and the movement that was trying to have this
genetic engineering work forbidden, triumphed. So the government
of the planet of the Elohim ordered the scientists to halt their
experiments and forced them to destroy all their works.
The group which led the battle against these genetic manipulations
was presided by an Eloha called Satan.
The scientists were finally permitted to go to another planet and
pursue their experiments. A description of this event is described in
Matthew 13:3-4. It is a parable which describes the works of the
creation of life on other planets by the Elohim:
A sower went forth to sow; and when he sowed, some seeds fell
by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up.

The birds are the messengers sent by Satan, who thought that the
planet chosen for their creation of life experiments was far too close
to their own, and that if by chance the beings created in a laboratory
were in fact more intelligent than their creators, and became violent,
they could prove to be dangerous for the population of the Elohim’s
planet. The government gave them permission to once again destroy
the works of the scientists.
They had to search for another planet which lent itself to the
creation of life, but they failed twice. The first time, the chosen planet
was too close to a star, and the creation was burnt by the harmful rays
coming from that star, and on the second one, they were invaded by
the vegetation. Finally, they reached a planet which offered all the
necessary elements so that their creation could survive, and it was
located far enough away so as not to show any signs of danger in the
eyes of the association presided over by Satan.
Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and
forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth:
And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they
had no root, they withered away. And some fell among thorns;
277

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

and the thorns sprung up, and choked them: but other fell into
good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold,
some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to hear, let him
hear. Matthew 13: 5-9.

We know the Elohim also created life on two other planets at that
time, hence the allusion to “three harvests”.
We also know that the permission which allowed the scientists to
come to Earth to create life was granted to them on the sole condition
that they did not create people in their image. The first message
explains how they overruled this order and also shows the reaction of
their government, which strictly forbade them to reveal to the first
terrestrial men, whom they had fabricated, how they had been
created and who they were, and demanded that these first men be
obligated to fear their creators, by asking the creators to show
themselves as supernatural beings, divine beings in some way.
Satan thought that one could not expect anything good from these
scientifically created creatures, and that out of Man only evil could
come.
So we understand perfectly that Satan was just one of the Elohim,
leading, in some way, a political party on the planet, that was opposed
to the creation of artificial beings in their image by other Elohim who
themselves thought that they could create positive and non-violent
beings.
Then came Lucifer, which means “light bearer”. Lucifer is one of
the Elohim who created life on Earth, thus created Man.
Lucifer was heading a small group of scientists working in one of
the genetic engineering laboratories which studied the behavior of the
first synthetic men. Noticing the extraordinary aptitudes exhibited by
their creation, Lucifer decided to overrule the order and reveal to
these first humans that those whom they had mistaken for “Gods”
where in fact men like themselves, made of flesh and blood, and who
came from another planet in flying machines made of palpable
material. Lucifer, and the Elohim who followed him, felt love and
278

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

affection for their synthetically created humans. They started to love
these beings as their own children - these beings that they studied all
day long, who were obliged to look upon them as “Gods”.
They could not bear to see their creatures, who seemed to be a
physical and psychological success, and who were beautiful and
intelligent, on their hands and knees adoring them as if they were
idols, all of this just because the government of their planet of origin,
of which Yahweh was the president, strictly forbade them from telling
their creations the truth and forced the Elohim to play the role of
supernatural beings permanently.
Lucifer, “the bearer of light”, enlightened the first men when he
revealed that the creators were not “Gods” but men like themselves.
This attitude is directly opposed to that of Satan who thinks that only
evil can be expected from men, and also to Yahweh, the president of
the council of the Eternals governing the Elohim’s planet.
So far, no creature with horns.
Yahweh condemns the scientists who had disobeyed his orders to
spend the rest of their lives in exile on Earth. He condemns the
“serpent” to crawl on Earth, as it is so poetically written, and evicts
Man from the laboratory, the “Garden of Eden” where they were fed
and lodged without having to make the slightest effort.
But Satan doesn’t give up over this, as what he wishes is that all the
beings that have been created, be totally destroyed, because he judges
them to be dangerous, due to their violence. As time passes, Satan
accumulates proof of Man’s aggression by observing the way in which
humans kill each other with the weapons that are given to them by
the sons of Lucifer’s exiled group of Elohim. The latter is involved in
“tender” relations with the daughters of men who manage to receive
weapons in exchange for their charms, under the false pretense of
giving them to their fathers or brothers so that they can hunt for
food. In fact, men choose to fight abominable battles among
themselves with this arsenal.
Seeing the proofs of such a slaughter, brought by Satan before the
Council of the Eternals, Yahweh decides to do what Satan asks, that
is to say, totally destroy the life that has been created on Earth, and
279

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

by the same token allow Lucifer’s group to return to their own planet
and be forgiven, thus putting an end to their exile.
But when Lucifer’s group learns that their fabulous creation is soon
to be destroyed, they decide that they cannot allow that. They still
feel very strongly that among men there are some who are positive
and non-violent, full of love and fraternity. Among these was Noah
whom they helped build a space craft which would protect him from
destruction, by staying in orbit around the earth. This craft contained
a few men and women and the genetic codes of some animal species,
which would be used to re-create them after the cataclysm.
It was only then that the Elohim discovered that they too had been
created in the same manner that they had created man, scientifically,
in a laboratory, by other people coming from another world. They
then decided never again to destroy humanity, and helped Lucifer’s
group to re-implant the life forms preserved in the “ark”. Satan is still
convinced of the evil in Man, but he bows before the majority of
those who, behind Yahweh, think the contrary within the council of
the Eternals. Yahweh understood, through the message contained in
the unmanned spaceship coming from another planet which landed
on their planet, that if men are violent they will “self-destroy” when
they discover energies enabling them to enter an interplanetary level
of civilization.
The Elohim decided to let men progress by themselves, but chose
certain people, or had them born on Earth, who would be responsible
for the creation of the religions, which were designed to keep traces
of their work on Earth, so that the creators of Man would be
recognized as such when the time came when mankind had
sufficiently evolved, scientifically, to be able to understand rationally.
Messages of such importance could be given only to trustworthy
people, and first of all, the Elohim had to assure themselves that their
chosen ones were faithful to their creators, so that they would not
betray what was revealed to them. So Satan was given the
responsibility of testing the prophets.
How are they going to test the faithfulness of these people? Once
a person has been contacted by the messengers of the Elohim, telling
280

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

him of his mission, Satan or one of his men would contact the
prophet-to-be and by slander would destroy the Elohim in his mind,
trying to get the human to abjure his fathers, or to accept to betray
his mission on the promise of material advantages, for example. What
is the word for slanderer in Greek? Simply diablos. Here is our famous
devil, but he still has no horns, no hooves...
Jesus, for example, was taken into the desert for forty days for his
initiation period, and was at certain times confronted with, “the
devil” to see if he would deny his father:
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be
17
tempted of the devil. Matthew 4: 1.

Or, to be clearer: ‘Jesus was taken to the desert to be tested by a
slanderer.’
The many tests imposed by “the devil” are also described. First of
all, he asks Jesus to turn the stones into bread to prove he is the son
of God:
‘If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones become
bread.’ But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the
17
mouth of God.’ Matthew 4: 3-4.

Jesus tells Satan that it is more important to be faithful to the
Elohim than to eat. The devil is tempting him with food since Jesus
has fasted for quite some time. Then Jesus is carried to the pinnacle
of the temple and told to jump so that the “angels of God” will
cushion his fall to prevent him from being injured:
‘If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He
shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and, On their hands
they shall bear thee up, lest haply thou dash thy foot against a
281

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

stone.’ Jesus said unto him, ‘Again it is written, Thou shalt not
17
make trial of the Lord thy God.’ Matthew 4: 6-7.

Jesus replies to the devil that he has not been placed on Earth for the
useless exercise of testing his creators, thus proving that he does not ask
for their help at every moment.
Then Satan leads Jesus to the top of a high mountain and proposes
to make him a great and very rich king on the Earth.
Again, the devil taketh him unto an exceeding high mountain,
and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them; and he said unto him, ‘All these things will I give thee, if
thou wilt fall down and worship me.’ Then saith Jesus unto him,
‘Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.’ Then the devil
17
leaveth him; and behold, angels came and ministered unto him.
Matthew 4: 8-11.

Jesus shows his loyalty to the Elohim whom he prefers to serve
rather than become a powerful and rich man. It must be noted in
these verses that Jesus refers to the slanderer by his name, since he
calls him Satan. Since the test was successful, the “angels”, the
Elohim’s messengers, came down to Jesus to complete the initiation.
Jesus was not the only one to be tested by “the devil”; Job was also
tested by Satan. The beginning of The Book of Job is quite eloquent,
as it shows clearly what good relations, or even fraternal relations
there were between Yahweh and Satan:
Now there was a day when the sons of Elohim came to present
themselves before Yahweh, and Satan came also among them.
And Yahweh said unto Satan, ‘Whence comest thou?’ Then Satan
answered Yahweh, and said, ‘From going to and fro in the earth,
and from walking up and down in it.’ And Yahweh said unto
Satan, ‘Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none
282

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
feareth Elohim, and escheweth evil?’ Then Satan answered
Yahweh, and said, ‘Doth Job fear Elohim for nought? Hast not
thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about
all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But put forth
thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee
to thy face.’ And Yahweh said unto Satan, ‘Behold, all that he
hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand.’
So Satan went forth from the presence of Yahweh. Job 1: 6-12.

We can see clearly that Yahweh is above Satan in the Elohim
hierarchy. But still he authorizes Satan, in his capacity of “opposition
party leader”, to do as he pleases, by giving him Job, so to speak, so
that he can prove that he can take a man who loves the Elohim
profoundly, and bring him to hate them if he is afflicted by
misfortunes, ruin or sickness.
In fact, Satan ruins Job totally, but the latter continues to love and
show respect for the Elohim:
Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
down upon the ground, and worshipped, and said, ‘Naked came
I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither:
Yahweh gave, and Yahweh hath taken away; blessed be the name
of Yahweh.’ In all this Job sinned not, nor charged Elohim
foolishly. Job 1: 20-22.

But Satan doesn’t give up; he reports to the president of the
Council of the Eternals:
Again there was a day when the sons of Elohim came to present
themselves before Yahweh, and Satan came also among them to
present himself before Yahweh. And Yahweh said unto Satan,
‘From whence comest thou?’ And Satan answered Yahweh, and
283

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

said, ‘From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up
and down in it.’ And Yahweh said unto Satan, ‘Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the
earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth Elohim, and
escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although
thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.’
And Satan answered Yahweh, and said, ‘Skin for skin, yea, all that
a man hath will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now,
and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy
face.’ And Yahweh said unto Satan, ‘Behold, he is in thine hand;
but save his life..’ Job 2: 1-6.

Yahweh therefore allows Satan to ruin Job’s health so as to see if he
will always love his creators. And Job continues to respect the Elohim.
Only then he began to ask Yahweh why he had been brought into the
world, if it was only to be afflicted with all kinds of misfortunes.
Finally, Yahweh intervenes and briefly explains to Job what has
happened. Yahweh tells Job that he is wrong to judge his creators who
ran the test, and to regret having been born. Yahweh restores Job’s
health, and even more possessions than he had before he was ruined.
At the end of the meeting I had with Yahweh on the relay vessel,
he stepped out for a few moments, telling me that he would meet
with me later. Then one of the other two Elohim asked me to follow
him.
He took me to a small room, marvelously decorated. The walls
were like the interior of a round pyramid, and those walls were
covered with luminous sound waves which gave the impression of
multicolored water waves. Everything was moving to a marvelously
relaxing rhythm of musical vibrations. After having me seated in a
comfortable chair which was covered with black fur, giving it the
impression of being alive, he said:
‘I must warn you that among the Elohim there is not only one
opinion as to the future of Humanity on Earth. Yahweh thinks that
men are good, and he feels that we should let them progress by
themselves, convinced that if they are negative, they will self-destroy.
284

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

All my many followers and I, think that men are evil and that we
should help mankind hasten its self-destruction. We propose that you
help us accelerate the final cataclysm, which would only purify the
universe of beings who are only the result of an unsuccessful
experiment.
If you try to accomplish the mission given to you by Yahweh, you
will always remain a poor man, and you will have to put up with the
sarcasm of everyone. You will suffer, perhaps even be put in jail, or
even worse, put to death by your own blood brothers. If you accept
my offer, and carry out my plan based on increasing the various racist
tendencies existing in human beings so that a racial world conflict
erupts, I will make you very powerful and rich. Your role will consist
of publishing the books which I will dictate to you, and which will
enable you to create various political and spiritual movements
preaching the destruction of the Arab race, the yellow race and the
black race, who have taken over all the riches and the raw materials
that the white race needs and deserves to have, since it was the efforts
of white men which permitted them to develop techniques to search
for them and to utilize them in the first place. As soon as this
planetary conflict breaks out, you and all those people who have
helped you to bring it about, will be saved. We will take you to safety
on board one of our crafts, and eventually you will be allowed to
return to Earth when everything has been destroyed, so that you can
start a new humanity. You will govern this new civilization as you
may desire, and with our help of course.
In the meantime, as soon as you return to Earth, there will be a
sum of 1 billion, 5 billion, 10 billion, or more if you wish, deposited
in the name of a foundation in a Swiss bank account, to help you get
started. Tell us what that sum should be, and if it is not sufficient,
other deposits will be made immediately.
Furthermore, if you accept to help us, you and all of those people
who will have helped you, will have the right to eternal life.
The only thing we ask is that you do so, so that Humanity destroys
the horrible civilization that is theirs today. For this, you will also
have to tell them that you have met with an extra-terrestrial, and he
285

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

has warned you of an invasion of the Earth by them. We will give you
the necessary proofs of our existence, and no one will doubt your
words anymore. In this way, Humanity will increase its armaments to
prepare itself against possible attack from the sky. This will prevent
Yahweh from another approach attempting to stop men from killing
each other, from building up an even greater stock of nuclear
weapons and aggression on Earth.
Consider on the one hand, some people are asking you to work for
an already lost cause, since sooner or later, men will blow themselves
off the face of the Earth. These same people will not even give you
proofs of their existence to help you to convince your brothers, nor
any financial aid. They will leave you to face the sarcasm, the police
and judicial pressures that might lead you to prison, without
counting the possibility that some fanatic might kill you because you
claim that there is no “God”. On the other hand, my proposition
makes you a rich and very powerful man immediately, a man who
will only have accelerated a course in which humans are already
destined.
So, what is your decision? Do you want to think about it for a few
days before giving me your answer?’
And I answered: ‘I am not at all convinced that Humanity will selfdestroy, even though there is a nine out of ten chance that it will.
Even if there was only one chance in a thousand that Humanity
suppressed its aggression and escaped destruction, I think that it
would be worthwhile taking this one chance. I would like to think
that men will understand before it is too late. And even if the final
cataclysm occurred, Yahweh told me that all the people who will have
fought for peace and non-violence will be saved, in order to repopulate the Earth and try to build a loving world. Your proposition
does not offer anything more, except perhaps that in your plan, only
those people who will have contributed to the explosion of violence
will be saved. The new civilization which they would then structure
could not avoid being violent, because of the dominant
characteristics of its founders, directly, socially and hereditarily.
286

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - T HE D EVIL D OES N OT E XIST, I M ET H IM

The mere fact of telling Humanity of the invasion of Earth by
extra-terrestrials would be sufficient to trigger more fear and then
increase aggression on our planet. So even if there is only one chance
in a thousand that the Earth could be saved at the present time, this
chance would be cut in half upon hearing the news of a possible
intervention on your part. One of the most important factors which
can contribute to lessening violence between men is the awakening of
the mind to the universe and to the infinite. If all men looked to the
sky with hope and fraternity, then they would feel much closer to
each other and would think less about killing each other.
I am not interested in becoming rich and powerful. I have almost
nothing, but the little I have is all that I need to live very happily. My
mission which I am accomplishing fills my life with happiness. All I
need is food for my children and a roof over their heads. All of this
has been given to me by faithful disciples who wish to help me bring
the truth to all the people of Earth. I cannot live in two houses at the
same time, nor can I drive two cars simultaneously, and even if I
owned my house, that does not mean that I could sleep any better,
nor would the fire be warmer. As for the mission entrusted to me by
Yahweh, I would much rather that it be carried out through the
collective efforts of those who wish to welcome the Elohim, as this
would certainly be the most beautiful proof of love that we can give
to our creators.’
‘So you are refusing my proposition?’ asked the Eloha.
‘Yes, and for all the reasons which I have just mentioned, since I
am fundamentally opposed to violence.’
‘Are you sure you will never regret this?’ he asked. ‘Would you not
rather wait and think about it?’
‘I will never change my mind, no matter what happens to me. Even
if my life was in danger, I would much rather direct my efforts so that
love and fraternity unite all men, so that they welcome their creators,
as the Elohim deserve to be welcomed.’
At that moment, the door opened, and Yahweh entered with the
other Eloha. He told me, ‘I am very pleased with the reaction that
you have had to the proposals which were made to you. I was
287

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

convinced of your reactions, but Satan, our brother, who has just
tested you, will not be convinced that something good can be
expected of men until they are united, and money and all weapons
are destroyed. My second companion who is so happy with your
behavior is Lucifer, who was the first to put faith in mankind even
before I had understood the need to let Humanity progress, and let
Man go alone through the final test of resolving violence without an
intervention on our part.’
Satan then told me that he thought there were not more than a
dozen men like me on Earth. Love and fraternity shone from his face,
and he was of the opinion that it was not because some rare
exceptions existed, that Humanity deserved the right to exist.
Then we returned to the more spacious of the two ships, the one
that would bring me to the planet of the Eternals, where my
initiation was to be completed. All of this is related in the book which
contains the second message, Extra-Terrestrials Took Me To Their
Planet.

My Father Who Art in Heaven
On my first encounter with this extra-terrestrial, whom I did not
then know to be Yahweh, the president of the Council of the
Eternals, I was wondering why they had chosen me to become their
messenger on Earth. He told me that they had decided to “choose”
someone after the first atomic explosion at Hiroshima, which took
place on August 6th 1945. Then he added: ‘We have been following
you since your birth, and even before.’ (Refer to pg. 8 of The Book
Which Tells The Truth).
In the beginning, I found this answer to be very intriguing, and
during the two years between the first and second message, I often
pondered on this subject.
I had to wait until I met Yahweh again to clarify this matter in full.
288

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M Y FATHER W HO A RT I N H EAVEN

He revealed the truth of my origins at the end of his remarks
addressed to the people of Israel, as reported in the second message
when we were then on the planet of the Eternals.
Once again I was told to put on one of these belts with a large
buckle, which enables one to travel in the air by following certain
wave currents. I found myself flying about 20 meters above luxuriant
vegetation after a smooth exit from the laboratory, where my mind
had been modified in the strange shell-shaped chair.
In ten seconds or so, we had reached a paradisiacal clearing where
a few prophets, with whom I had a meal earlier, were sitting. A few
hundred meters below, I could see immense and magnificent sandy
beaches, bordering on a sea of deep blue waters of such depth and
beauty that none of the coves of the Mediterranean sea could match
it, or even come close. The blue of the water was like that of a
Californian swimming pool, but it spread out to the horizon, with
great pink and green areas within the blue sea. When I looked more
attentively, I could see traces of every color, each more beautiful than
the next, as if the bottom of the sea had been painted for some 10
kilometers. I asked where these extraordinary colors had come from,
and was told that the seaweed gave the water its coloration. The
seaweed had been created and implanted artistically to produce the
special effect that I had noticed.
The belt allowed me to descend gently in the small clearing near
the group of ten or so prophets. The one who had been introduced
to me as Jesus, came to meet us.
Following Yahweh, we all went and sat on seats carved out of the
rock. All the seats were covered with this marvellous black fur which
seemed to be alive. We were located on a cliff overlooking the sea.
Yahweh asked me if during the last two years since our first
meeting, there had been some question which has preoccupied me
more particularly. Without hesitation, I told him that I had often
wondered what he had meant when he had explained, ‘we have been
following you since your birth and even before.’
I had twisted the question many times in my mind wondering if it
had meant that my parents had been chosen before my conception,
289

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

and if they had been guided telepathically to each other to bear me,
or if they already knew each other when they were chosen, or if I had
been conceived when they were chosen, or rather when the embryo
which they had created was chosen.
Yahweh answered this question that was very important to me. His
answer was even more extraordinary than I had anticipated.
At that moment, he stopped addressing me in French by the polite
form of vous and started addressing me by the personal form of tu. He
then said:
‘The person whom you looked upon as your father was not your
real father. After the explosion at Hiroshima, we decided that the
time had come for us to send a new messenger on Earth. He would
be the last prophet, but the first one to address Mankind asking them
to understand and not to believe. We then selected a woman, as we
had done in the time of Jesus. This woman was taken aboard one of
our ships and inseminated as we had done with the mother of Jesus.
Then she was freed after we had totally erased from her memory all
traces of what had happened.
But before all of this had happened, we had arranged so that she
would meet a man, who could support the child financially and
would raise him decently. This man had to be from a different
religion than that of the woman so that the child could be raised
without strong religious conditioning. This is why the man whom
you took for your father and believed that he truly was, was a Jew.
Your real father is also the father of Jesus, and that makes you
brothers. You are presently looking at your father. Your foster-father
was like Joseph, he was to take care of you and your mother until
such time as you could provide for yourself. From this moment on,
you can talk to me using tu, because you are my son and I am your
father.’
Of the entire journey, this was the most touching moment. And I
could see in Yahweh’s eyes an equally great emotion and feeling of
love. Jesus too seemed to be moved by the same feelings. Then I
kissed my father and my brother for the very first time.
290

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M Y FATHER W HO A RT I N H EAVEN

Then Yahweh asked me not to reveal this parental tie until three
years had passed. This is the reason why I have never talked about it
until now.
In any case, it is of no importance, we must not make the same
mistake as those men who recognized Jesus as a messenger who came
from the heavens. It is not the messenger who is important, but the
message itself.
‘Jesus came on Earth to show the way but men kept looking at his
finger.’, said a great thinker, and it is unfortunately true.
I, Rael, am also showing you the path to follow, in revealing the
messages given to me by my father “who is in heaven”. It is more
important to recognize the Elohim as our fathers and to prepare their
embassy on Earth as they requested, than to pay attention to the
messenger. Only the messages are important and through them the
recognition of those who sent them, but not the messenger.
Do not look at my finger, but rather in the direction in which it’s
pointed.

Message from Yahweh to the Men of the Earth:
The Apocalypse of the Final Nuclear Cataclysm
I, Yahweh, through the words of my prophet Rael, address all the
people of Earth:
There is, unfortunately, but one chance in one hundred that your
Humanity will not self-destroy, and every Raelian must act as if
Mankind would be wise enough to understand and grab this tiny
chance of escaping the final cataclysm, so as to enter the Golden Age.
Better still, each Raelian, by his work of awakening minds,
contributes to strengthening this unique and minute chance of
survival to prevent it from becoming even weaker.
291

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

It is impossible to predict the future, for it is impossible to travel
in time, but it is always possible to predict the future of a biological
entity, and the whole of Humanity can be considered as a biological
entity. If a primitive woman was inseminated by a scientist, the latter
could predict this woman’s future. He could predict that in nine
months she would give birth to a child, and could even go so far as
determining the sex of the child.
In the same way, we who are used to creating life on an infinity of
planets, know what happens to a Humanity which has reached your
level of technology, without having reached an equivalent level of
wisdom.
This is why, although we cannot predict the future of individuals,
we can predict, however, what should normally happen to a living
organism during the gestation period or to a Humanity in the course
of its development.
When the first cell is created in the mother’s womb by the meeting
of the spermatozoon and the ovule, this first cell contains all the
necessary information to create a complete being, able to accomplish
a multitude of functions. And the more numerous the cells, the more
numerous are the functions developed. The number of functions is
proportional to the number of cells obtained by successive divisions,
until the child is ready to be born, because only then does he become
a complete organism, with all the organs which he will require to
accomplish all the functions which will fill his every need.
It is exactly the same thing for humanity, considering each human
to be like a cell of the great being in gestation, that is, Humanity.
The number of functions, of discoveries, and the technological
level of Mankind is proportional to the number of humans. In this
way, we can easily predict that the age of the Apocalypse will be
achieved when Men are able to make the blind recover their sight
with electronic prostheses, when Man’s voice will be carried beyond
the oceans through satellite telecommunication, and when Man will
be equal to those he had mistaken for “God”, by creating synthetic
beings in a laboratory, etc.
292

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

All these predictions rely on an in-depth knowledge of the biology
of the species. We know that a foetus will develop his eyes at a certain
month of his growth, and his sexual organs at another month, and
that the same rule applies to all living species which are developing.
We know that it will make discoveries permitting the
accomplishment of such and such a scientific prowess after so many
hundreds or thousands of years. It’s exactly the same thing.
We have dictated our messages to the prophets of old, so as to be
recognized by men when the time would come for us to show
ourselves openly, without this creating new deistic religions, i.e. when
all men would be capable of understanding.
Among these texts is the Apocalypse, which we dictated to John. We
showed him, through a visualizer similar to your television sets, the
events which would happen to men when they would reach the Age
of the Apocalypse.
The text of the Apocalypse of John was unfortunately overloaded
and distorted by primitive transcribers who could not be anything
other than God-believing people.
John starts his story by telling of his encounter with us:
I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a
17
great voice, as of a trumpet. Revelation 1: 10.

Here he explains that he is trying to communicate with us
telepathically, this is what he calls being “in the spirit” on the Sunday,
referred to as the “Lord’s day”, and that he heard a metallic voice “as
of a trumpet”; this is something you all know: The sounds produced
by an electrical loudspeaker.
Then John turned around to see what was behind him:
Then I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. And having
turned I saw seven golden lampstands, and in the midst of the
seven lampstands One like the Son of Man, clothed with a
garment down to the feet and girded about the chest with a
293

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

golden band.
His head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and His
eyes like a flame of fire; His feet were like fine brass, as if refined
in a furnace, and His voice as the sound of many waters;
He had in His right hand seven stars, out of His mouth went a
sharp two-edged sword, and His countenance was like the sun
12
shining in its strength. Revelation 1: 12-16.

John saw seven flying machines made of a golden metal, “seven
golden lampstands”, in the middle of which stood a little being, “one
like the Son of Man”, dressed in a flying suit which was molded to his
body, even his feet, and he is wearing a large belt. His skin and his
hair are white; his helmet is equipped with two small projectors
which John mistook for his eyes. His feet are standing on thick,
insulated soles of yellow metal, and he speaks with a powerful voice,
“and his voice as the sound of many waters”.
In his hand, the little person holds an apparatus made of seven
luminous signals, which are bridged to the seven vessels placed near
him. The two-edged sword, on the other hand, is only a detail added
later on by the transcribers to reinforce the menace of apparition, to
increase the power of “God” and the fear of “God” of the first
Christians. The being who appeared in front of John was indeed one
of us.
John, panic-stricken, fell with his face to the ground:
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as one dead. And he laid his
right hand upon me, saying, ‘Fear not; I am the first and the last,
and the Living one; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for
evermore, and I have the keys of death and of Hades. Write
therefore the things which thou sawest, and the things which are,
17
and the things which shall come to pass hereafter.’
Revelation 1: 17-20

294

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

We asked John to get up, and we told him that he must write
everything that he had seen, and everything that would be dictated to
him, so that men could find those writings when the time would
come. We told him that we were “the first and the last”, that is to say,
the first on Earth and the last if men self-destroy when they discover
energies to permit them to do so. We explained to him that the one
who was speaking had known death, but had been re-created, thanks
to the process explained in the first message, which permits us to live
eternally through many bodies.
And behold, a door opened in heaven, and the first voice that I
heard, a voice as of a trumpet speaking with me, one saying,
Come up hither, and I will show thee the things which must
come to pass hereafter.
Straightway I was in the Spirit: and behold, there was a throne set
17
in heaven, and one sitting upon the throne. Revelation 4: 1-2.

John sees “a door opened in heaven”; the door of one of our
machines is opened, and he is taken inside on a carrying ray. This is
totally incomprehensible for him, and this is why he says, “in the
spirit”.
There he sees someone sitting in a chair and around him a total of
24 other people also sitting on “thrones”.
I, Yahweh, was this person sitting on the throne, and around me
were sitting 24 other Eternals representing the Council of the
Eternals, the governing body of our planet.
Then I turned on the apparatus designed to visualize thoughts, and he
saw what would normally happen to Humanity, and also what would
happen when the time would come:
And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had
a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth
conquering, and to conquer. Revelation 6: 2.
295

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

This is in relation to the first of the seven seals, or if you prefer, the
seven chapters of the history of Humanity. This is, in fact, the
triumph of Christianity on Earth, and it allows The Old Testament
to be revealed to everyone. Then the second seal is opened:
And there went out another horse that was red: and power was
given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and
that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him
a great sword. Revelation 6: 4.

This red horse represents the religious wars and wars in general,
which will be one of the principal causes in the tardiness of humans
to increase their number. Then comes the third seal:
And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a
pair of balances in his hand.
And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, ‘A measure
of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny;
and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine’.
Revelation 6: 5-6.

The black horse is the famine, which will claim a considerable
number of lives before Mankind solves the problem on Earth
completely. And then comes the fourth seal:
And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on
him was Death, and Hell followed with him. Revelation 6: 8.

This pale horse represents the great epidemics and plagues, and
many others which have decimated Humanity. Then the fifth seal is
broken:

296

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

When He opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
those who had been slain for the word of God and for the
testimony which they held.
And they cried with a loud voice, saying, ‘How long, O Lord,
holy and true, until You judge and avenge our blood on those
who dwell on the earth?’
Then a white robe was given to each of them; and it was said to
them that they should rest a little while longer, until both the
number of their fellow servants and their brethren, who would be
12
killed as they were, was completed. Revelation 6: 9-11.

This scene represents what happened when the great prophets,
living eternally in our company on our planet, asked us to allow men
who had lived a positive life to be re-created before the final
judgment. We gave permission so that a few thousand people from
Earth, who we re-created, could live among us immediately, whereas
first we had decided to keep their genetic code in order to re-create
them only when Humanity had completed its evolution. Then the
sixth seal was opened:
I looked when He opened the sixth seal, and behold, there was a
great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair,
and the moon became like blood. And the stars of heaven fell to
the earth, as a fig tree drops its late figs when it is shaken by a
mighty wind.
Then the sky receded as a scroll when it is rolled up, and every
mountain and island was moved out of its place.
And the kings of the earth, the great men, the rich men, the
commanders, the mighty men, every slave and every free man,
12
hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains.
Revelation 6: 12-15.
297

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The sixth seal represents the final danger for Humanity, the
greatest danger, the one which could destroy it completely: the
atomic war. The “great earthquake” is the explosion itself, the “black
sun” is the darkening of the sky by the mushroom cloud, and the fallout dust that you all know so well will darken the moon. “The sky
receded as a scroll” is when the clouds are chased abruptly by the
sudden surge of hot air coming from the explosion. The men who
hide in the rocks of the mountains are the people who rush into antinuclear shelters. It is from this final cataclysm, if it happens, that
people who will have followed our prophet, will be saved - those
people who will have had their cellular plan transmitted after having
read or heard of the messages.
Those people will have been selected by our huge computer, which
follows all people from conception to death.
Then I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal
of the living God. And he cried with a loud voice to the four
angels to whom it was granted to harm the earth and the sea,
saying, ‘Do not harm the earth, the sea, or the trees till we have
12
sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.’
Revelation 7: 2-3.

The people who will be sealed in the forehead will be those who
will have their cellular plan transmitted by manual contact between
our prophet and their forehead bone, which contains the purest and
the most authentic genetic code. The total of those who will be
“sealed in the forehead” will be around 144,000, which will include
those people already re-created on our planet, those people who will
have led a life dedicated to the blossoming of Humanity without ever
hearing of the messages, and also those people who will recognize
Rael as our messenger after having read the messages.
For as long as the total of these human beings does not reach
144,000, we will help to delay the final cataclysm, so as to have a

298

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

sufficient number to start a new generation on Earth, when it has
become a suitable place again for humans to live.
If the sixth seal represents the discovery and the first utilization of
the atomic weapon, the seventh seal represents the final cataclysm, a
worldwide atomic war, which ends with the destruction of all life on
Earth.
When the first trumpet of the seventh seal sounded:
...and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they
were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt up,
and all green grass was burnt up. Revelation 8: 7.

One third of the Earth is burnt by radioactivity; the trees and the
green grass no longer grow.
And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the
sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures which were
in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were
destroyed. Revelation 8: 8-9.

The explosion produced an enormous eruption of lava which ran
into the ocean, destroying one third of the marine life and one third
of the ships.
And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part
of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of
the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters
became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because
they were made bitter. Revelation 8: 10-11.

299

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Atomic explosions follow in retort to the first attack; the missiles,
“great burning stars from Heaven”, fall everywhere. Most of the
drinking water becomes polluted, and many people die from it.
And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone
not for a third part of it, and the night likewise. Revelation 8: 12.

The dust and the ashes raised by successive nuclear explosions are
so thick that the sky is darkened, obscuring the Sun, the Moon and
the stars, which gives the impression that the day and the night are
shorter.
And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven
unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless
pit.
And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out
of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air
were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.
Revelation 9: 1-2.

This is the description of a missile falling and the mushroom cloud
it creates.
Then out of the smoke locusts came upon the earth. And to them
was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.
They were commanded not to harm the grass of the earth, or any
green thing, or any tree, but only those men who do not have the
seal of God on their foreheads.
And they were not given authority to kill them, but to torment
300

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

them for five months. Their torment was like the torment of a
scorpion when it strikes a man.
In those days men will seek death and will not find it; they will
12
desire to die, and death will flee from them. Revelation 9: 3-6.

The locusts are airplanes loaded with atomic bombs which will fall
on the great cities, and through exposure to radioactivity, will inflict
terrible suffering on those people who will have survived the
explosions. They will be poisoned by radiation, in much the same
way as one can be poisoned by the sting of a scorpion.
And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and
their faces were as the faces of men.
And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as
the teeth of lions.
And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the
sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses
running to battle.
And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in
their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.
Revelation 9: 7-10.

Those metallic locusts covered with metal, looked like horses going
to war, in the eyes of a primitive man. They had a cockpit inside of
which a man’s face could be seen “as the faces of men”, and in flying
very high, they left behind a trail of white smoke that John calls hair,
and their “teeth” are the missiles tucked under their wings. The
“breastplates of iron” are the fuselage, and the noise comes from the
jet engines, as is familiar to you. The power in the “tails like unto
301

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

scorpions” is the radiation produced by the missiles which were
dropped on the population of the countries that were attacked.
And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar which is before Yahweh...
Revelation 9: 13.

John describes the four loud-speakers located in front of me while
I was making him see all this.
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on
them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone:
and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of
their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.
By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by
the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their
mouths.
For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails
were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do
hurt. Revelation 9: 17-19.

Again this is the description of more planes; the “heads of the
horses” are the jet-engines from which flames and smoke come out.
The tail with “heads, with them they do hurt” are the nuclear
missiles, and you can understand that the “heads” refers to the head
of the missile, whether it’s self-directed or not. We gave John the most
detailed description possible, and this story reflects what he had seen
with his primitive eyes. Take this same story and tell it to an
Amazonian Indian, then ask him to write it down in his own words,
and you will get approximately the same type of recollection, more
so, if you ask 10 of his fellow tribe members to transcribe the story,
while the first man is not present.
302

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was
about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,
‘Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write
them not.’ Revelation 10: 4.

At this point we clearly told John that there was no “God” and that
we were men like him, and also we explained that he should keep this
as a secret and not write it, so as not to create a greater confusion
among the people who still needed a crutch to lean on, until the day
when Humanity had reached a sufficient level of technology when
everyone could understand what we had spoken of.
But in the days of the sounding of the seventh angel, when he is
about to sound, the mystery of God would be finished, as He
12
declared to His servants the prophets. Revelation 10: 7.

We clearly explained to him that when the time would come, men
would understand that there is no “God” and by the same token
would also understand that we were their creators.
...for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath,
because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.
Revelation 12: 12.

This final test of Humanity, that is, the choice between selfdestruction or the passage into the Golden Age, is the last
opportunity for Satan to prove that he was right in saying that
humanity was bad.
If Humanity brilliantly overcomes this last ordeal and succeeds in
obtaining total disarmament on the planet, then men will have
proven themselves worthy of receiving our inheritance, since they will
have shown they are truly non-violent. The “beast”, as described
further on in the text, is simply the use of nuclear energy for
murderous means:
303

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the
number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his
number is Six hundred threescore and six. Revelation 13: 18.

In fact, 666 is the number of human generations which will have
existed on Earth since the creation of the first men in the original
laboratories. The very first humans were created some 13,000 years
ago, and a human generation is estimated at an average of 20 years,
so if one multiplies 666 by 20, it equals 13,320 years.
The generation born at the beginning of the Age of Apocalypse in
1945 of the Christian era, was in fact the 666th since the creation of
the first man in a laboratory by the Elohim. This generation coincides
precisely with the first use of nuclear energy for destructive purposes
at Hiroshima, on August 6th, 1945.
Once again, interpretation was not required in order to
understand. One had only to read what had been written. 666 was
effectively the “number of Man”, the number of men who descended
from the creation, that is to say, the number of generations.
And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there
was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. Revelation 16: 18.

The after-shocks from the atomic explosions are tremendous, and
they are increased if they start a chain reaction.
And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.
Revelation 16: 20.

This monstrous explosion due to a chain reaction will brutally
divide the continents, engulfing the islands and sweeping the
mountains like a wisp of straw.

304

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent. Revelation 16: 21.

In those parts of the Earth untouched by the bombs, rocks are
falling from the sky, thousands of kilometers away from where the
bombs had fallen.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.
Revelation 21: 1.

John was able to see what one could see from a rocket moving away
from the Earth. It seemed as if it was the Earth that was retreating,
rather than the craft itself moving away. Then the spacecraft travels
through a starlit sky unfamiliar to a man of the Earth, “a new
Heaven”. Then the spaceship reaches another planet, “a new Earth”.
And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from
Yahweh out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband. Revelation 21: 2.

Looking from the spacecraft, the primitive has the feeling that the
city towards which the spacecraft is going, is “coming down out of
Heaven”, while it is evidently the spacecraft that is approaching.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, ‘Behold, the
tabernacle of Yahweh is with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall be his people, and Yahweh himself shall be with
them, and be their Elohim.
And Yahweh shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.’
Revelation 21: 3-4.
305

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

This is the description of the planet of the Eternals, where all the
people that we will save from the final cataclysm will live with us
while waiting to be re-implanted on Earth when it will be habitable
again, in order to re-create a peaceful civilization.
This is the outcome with which Humanity is faced, if it does not
reach a level of wisdom as high as its level of technology.
All this was seen by a primitive, because John was a primitive
compared to us, as was Moses, as was Jesus as well, as were all the
prophets compared to our level, before we gave them a sufficient
initiation so that they could foresee what was a certain mastery of
matter. Your most advanced scientists are also primitive compared to
what we can achieve today, the same as the Indians of the Amazon
are, compared to the scientists at Cape Canaveral.
This is, unfortunately, what awaits Humanity, with a 99 per cent
probability of occurring.
So that all of you who recognize us as your creators and who
recognize Rael as our last messenger on Earth, all of you must wrestle
to ensure that Humanity reaches out to this one little chance of
survival, by revealing our messages to the whole of Mankind. If this
is what you are doing, you can live in peace, and all the while try to
expand and fulfill yourselves even more, for if you are among the just,
who are doing everything within their power so that the truth and
non-violence may finally triumph, you can rest assured that we will
save you from the final cataclysm, if it should ever happen. Strive for
love, strive for fraternity, strive for intelligence, but do not despair if
you see that the great majority of men remain violent, aggressive and
stupid. Whichever way you look at it, your efforts will be rewarded.
Either Humanity will develop an interplanetary consciousness, and
the whole of Mankind will enter the Golden Age, or everything will
explode, and you will be those who we will save to rebuild everything.
I, Yahweh, the alpha and the omega, he who was the first one on
Earth and also he who will be the last, I am sending this message to
all humans of the Earth through the words of my prophet, Rael, to
all those humans whom we have created, and whom we have tried to
306

T HE N EW R EVELATIONS - M ESSAGE F ROM Y AHWEH TO T HE M EN O F T HE E ARTH

lead towards the Golden Age, and who we love as if they were our
own children.
Peace on Earth to all men of good-will and to all those who have
the will to be happy.
Our inheritance is ready, let us hope that the child will not die at
birth.
It’s your move!

307

3
AN ATHEIST RELIGION

Angels Without Wings
An angel from Heaven contacted me. He said that I was the
Messiah of the Apocalypse and told me to go and evangelize the
earth, and to create the church of which I would be the pope and
pontiff, I, the prophet of this Catholic religion.

Those people who know me, would probably say in reading these
words: ‘That’s it, now he has become irrational, the immensity of his
task has caused a serious psychological disorder, and he is betraying
the cause.’
This introduction could be interpreted at first as:
A being with wings, coming from the sky, contacted me. He told
me that I was a divine being, sent to announce the end of the
world, and that I should set out to preach the Gospel all over the
earth, and to build a church with stones and cement, of which I
would be the pope with a tiara and the pontiff sitting on a throne
and I, the prophet of this Catholic religion affiliated to Rome, I
was going to announce what is going to happen in the centuries
to come.

308

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - A NGELS W ITHOUT W INGS

Now let us try to find the true hidden meaning of the words
contained in this sentence.
As we have done for the words Elohim and Apocalypse, we must first
of all search the etymology, or true meaning of each important word.
While we are at it, let us start with the etymology of the word
Etymology, that is to say, its original meaning from the Greek eutemos
which means “true”, and logos which means “science”. The “science of
that word which is true” or the “science of the truth”. What could be
more natural for people who are gathered around The Book Which
Tells The Truth than to be etymologists, “seekers of the truth”?
Elohim was wrongly translated by the word God, since it really
meant “those who came from the sky” in Hebrew, and Apocalypse was
translated by “the end of the world” and all the while it meant
Revelation, as we are all now aware. So let us take the words one by
one in this apparently mystical introduction.
An angel from the sky contacted me.

Let us look it up in the dictionary: angel from the Greek angelos
means “messenger”. That alone changes the whole meaning. We can
now read:
A messenger from the sky contacted me.

The supernatural becomes understandable. Let’s continue:
He told me that I was the Messiah of the Apocalypse.

Messiah from the Aramean meschika means “anointed by the Lord”
or “sacred, chosen by the Lord”. Let’s first look at the word Lord to
better understand the word messiah. One discovers that the word
Lord - seigneur in French - comes from the Latin senior, meaning “the
oldest”. According to the vocabulary of the middle-ages, the “Lord”
309

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

was a person who ruled over a province. The “God” in whom The
Bible would make us believe is eternal, is obviously “the oldest”, thus
the “Lord” ruling the Earth. Through time, the word was
transformed, and the Catholic religion adopted “my Lord” –
“Monseigneur” in French, equivalent to the English word sire.
When the revolution came – in France – removing all the Lords,
unfortunately it spared those within the religion, which is why within
it, we still address bishops etc., as “My Lord” or “Monseigneur”.
So then, messiah means “chosen by God”, and as we know God is
a bad translation of the word Elohim which means “those who came
from the sky”, so we can therefore say that, in fact, messiah means “the
one chosen by those who came from the sky”. As we have already
seen, apocalypse, from the Greek, means “revelation”, and so we can
write clearly:
He told me that I had been chosen by those who came from the
sky for the Revelation.

It’s all clear. But let’s continue:
...to go and evangelize the earth.

Evangelize, is from the Greek word euagelion which means “good
news”. Then we can read:
...to go and spread the good news on Earth,

then:
...to create a church.

Church – eglise in French – ekklesia in Greek, which means
“assembly”. Then it becomes:
310

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - A NGELS W ITHOUT W INGS

to create an assembly.

Then it is written:
...of which I would be the pope and pontiff

Pope from the Greek pappas means “father”, and pontiff from the
Latin pontiflex means “to link”, like a bridge links two shores, or two
places on the Earth, or one planet to another planet.
We can thus clearly read:
...of which I will be the father and the liaison person between the
planet of our creators and the earth.

And lastly:
I, the prophet of this Catholic religion.

Prophet from the Greek prophetes means “the one who reveals”.
Religion from the Latin religio means “that which links” or “the tie”,
which unites the creators to their creation. Catholic from the Greek
katholikos which means “universal”.
Therefore, the end of the sentence means:
I, the one whose mission is to reveal the universal tie which unites
Man and his creators.

Let’s put all the pieces together, and we read:
A messenger from the sky contacted me. He told me that I had
been chosen by those who came from the sky, for the revelation,
to go and spread the good news on Earth, to create an assembly,
311

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

of which I would be the father and the liaison-person between the
planet of our creators and Earth, I, the one whose mission is to
reveal the universal tie which unites men and their creators.

If you take the mysticism out of the words, then the sentence
becomes rationally understandable for everyone. And yet the
sentence at the beginning of this chapter had exactly the same
meaning. In the mind of a mystical, narrow-minded primitive as
shown, our example demonstrates clearly how easy it is to change the
true sense of a sentence if the precise meaning of the words is not
respected.
Thus it becomes clear that the Raelian Movement is a religion; it
ties the creators of Humanity with their creation, even if it is in fact
an atheist religion, in the sense that it does not believe in the existence
of a God - atheist from the Greek atheos which means “denying the
existence of any form of divinity”.
Many people say that the practice of a cult defines the character of
a religion. What is a cult? Derived from the Latin cultus meaning
“tribute rendered to a God”, but we would then say “tribute rendered
to the creators”, since Elohim is a plural. The telepathic contact on
Sunday mornings at 11 o’clock, the obligation of thinking at least
once a day about the Elohim (Book 2, pg. 175), the obligation of
inviting the regional Guide at least once a year to one’s table so that
he can talk about the messages, the monthly meeting with the
regional Guide, the annual meeting on the 6th of August to celebrate
the entry into the Age of Apocalypse - all of those ceremonies could
be qualified as a cult, for each one of them is designed to pay tribute
to our creators, at regular intervals, alone or in groups.
Even if the Raelians do not believe in a “God”, they still recognize
Jesus as a messenger sent by our creators, just as they do Moses,
Buddha, Mohammed, Joseph Smith, and all the other great prophets
who have lived on this Earth, and await their return in the company
of the Elohim as the scriptures have predicted. The Raelian believes
in the deeper meaning of the scriptures, more particularly the biblical
312

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - A NGELS W ITHOUT W INGS

Genesis, but also in the Koran and many other religious books, all
their writings being stripped of their mystical meaning by the
messages of the Elohim.
Therefore the Raelian ignores the human laws which have been
grafted to the religious writings, these laws having been made by
Men, so as to enforce respect for governments and laws which were
purely human.
The tribute which we render to the Elohim could be called a “cult”,
why not? The cult in itself is not wrong, so long as it is not performed
by people who think of the Elohim as being divinities, but rather by
people who love them sincerely for the extraordinary act of love
which they have accomplished in giving us life, and in leaving us free
to progress by ourselves until such a time as we would be equal to
them.
There is no need to kneel down or to lie down with your face in
the dirt, under the stars, but rather look up at the sky, standing tall,
proud of being conscious of the privilege of living in this day and age
when we are able to understand and show love for our creators, to
love them for the fantastic potential they gave us to create life by
mastering and transforming minute particles of matter at our level, to
raise towards the galaxies, a forehead full of love and hope, the hope
to one day meet those to whom we owe our existence and the fact to
be able to understand why we are here and what our mission is in the
infinite of space and time.
Until recently, Humanity was worshipping the creators who had
created each man with the ability to understand the creators, so now
Man must understand the creators, so as to be able to love them even
more.
If Mankind uses science negatively, and a fatal nuclear cataclysm
occurs, all those people who will have worked to prevent this
catastrophe by trying to make Mankind aware of its errors in the
name of the Elohim, those people shall be saved by our creators.
Those people who have faith in our fathers will be rewarded by the
Elohim who have already provided access to eternal life on their
planet, where all the great prophets sent to Earth to awaken
313

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Humanity are presently living. The word faith comes from the Latin
fides and means “commitment, link”. So, it is therefore possible to not
“believe without understanding”, while, at the same time, giving your
trust to the Elohim, having faith in them, because those who have the
intelligence to have faith in them will be rewarded regardless. While
trying to prevent Humanity from committing the irrevocable error, a
Raelian has faith in the Elohim, because he knows that they will not
forget him in the event of a fatal cataclysm.

‘Deresponsibilisation’
If there had been a newspaper in Jerusalem 2,000 years ago, it would
have reported on the unemployment, the energy crisis due to a
shortage of slaves, and also of the ever increasing cost of living due to
the exorbitant Roman taxes. These headlines would have fed the
front-page of all the newspapers, if they existed, and would have fed
all the conversations. Then there would have been a few lines written
by the official “scientists” of the day, or an editor seeking recognition,
on this false prophet claiming to be “the king of the Jews”, and it
would be suggested to the authorities that this man be arrested
immediately because he is dragging a hoard of credulous people, his
“followers”, around with him. One should not abuse the public’s
credulity in this way...
So this “illuminated person” is then arrested, tried and sentenced
to death. This man who had dedicated his life to spreading the
messages of our creators will be found crucified between two bandits.
What crime had he committed? Unlawful practice of the truth
reserved only for the representatives of the officially registered
religions: those which had been in existence for at least two or three
hundred years? You could call it a sort of “controlled appellation”.

314

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitudes that
12
they should ask for Barabbas and destroy Jesus. Matthew 27: 20.

The “high priests” of the official religions and the news media
convince the masses that a religion has to be a few thousand years old
in order to be “acceptable”, and so all the others are nothing more
than dangerous sects.
All of those people stand between Man and the truth, by allowing
Man to believe in the religion of the “high priests” of the State – those
scientists who claim that Man comes from the monkey, but who, on
the other hand, baptize their children and place a cross on the grave
of their parents. They also obstruct the truth by allowing Man to
believe in the religion of traditions, which permit the great
fundamentals of our rotting society to survive a few years longer,
which promote and protect the family as a tax-payer, as a stagnant
closed system, and a strangler of personalities, which uphold the
nation which feeds the political men, who are capable of doing
anything to continue to get their pay. The military also do exactly the
same thing, as do, finally, all the low paid government employees who
have been taught not to feel responsible for their own actions and
who think they are protecting society when they condemn, torture or
even kill someone.
These are the religions that governments endorse, but by the same
token, they try to eliminate the ones that could make the young
generation vibrate with joy when it discovers the truth, which could
get them to think of destroying the outdated primitive structures and
replacing them by newer ones, much more adaptable to the futuristic
technological world in which we live.
The top priority of all those people who wish to manipulate the
population is to take away human responsibility, it is called
maximum “deresponsibilisation”. They are well aware as to why it
should be so. They know that a soldier will not kill someone else
unless he is totally convinced that he is doing it for a cause, that same
way that this soldier will not torture a prisoner unless he has been
315

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

convinced that this will help a great cause. They also know that a
citizen will oppose paying higher taxes unless he is told that it is to
help the farmers or victims of drought.
People will do anything for a great cause. The art of governing is to
convince people of the greatness of their country.
American scientists have recently conducted a conclusive
experiment in the field of responsibility. They hired actors who would
pretend to be subjects in an experiment on the potential of human
violence. Then through classified ads, they recruited people willing to
participate in an experiment to explore the possibilities of the human
brain. The people were placed one at a time at a desk equipped with
different levers which were supposed to send electrical charges to a
cubicle in which actors pretend to receive the charge. There were
thirty levers in all, which could supposedly each send out a charge of
15 volts and so altogether could send charges of 15 to 450 volts. They
were placed from left to right, and indicated whether the electric
charge would be light, moderately strong or very strong. On the other
hand, the actor could see the lights light up on the panel in front of
him showing the intensity of the shock he was supposed to have
received from the electric chair to which he was tied, and he could
therefore act accordingly. If the shock was light, he would simulate a
light reaction, if it was moderate, he would jump a little more and
give out a little cry, then he would protest by saying that he did not
wish to continue the experiment; if the intensity was increased, he
would scream and beg to be released, and finally when the maximum
voltage of 450 volts was reached, he would pretend to collapse. The
shocks were sent to the actors by those people who had been recruited
in classified ads. However, the recruits did not realize that they were
actors, and thought that they were sending real shocks to real people.
The actor was asked a simple question by a scientist, and when he
answered incorrectly, the classified ads recruits were to let them know
by giving them an electrical shock. This same scientist was urging the
sender to increase the voltage consistently, without listening to the
supplications of the receiver, saying to the sender that this experiment
316

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

would help science to progress immensely, and therefore all of
humanity.
This experiment, in which the observer was really the one being
observed, was repeated many times, so that statistics could be
established to know how many people would go as far as killing other
people in the name of scientific progress. It was also conducted in
many countries, so that the results could be compared and analyzed.
Contrary to the expectations of the scientists who had put together
this experiment, and the psychologists whom they had consulted, it
was not just a minority of people who were unbalanced enough to go
as far as pushing the 450 volt lever. In the US, 60 per cent of the
people obeyed the scientist, who told them not to listen to the cries
of those whom they were electrocuting, and continued to administer
shocks, even when those being shocked could no longer say anything,
which itself counted as an incorrect answer; and this three times in a
row, after which a new electrocutor was selected. This experiment was
also conducted in many European countries, where over 70 per cent
of the people went as far as the maximum voltage. The record high
was reached in Germany where 85 per cent of the people would have
been responsible for homicide by electrocution...
The conclusion of Professor Stanley Milgram of the Department of
Psychology at Yale University is as follows:
When the individuals are placed in a position of hierarchical
control, the mechanisms which ordinarily assure the regulation of
the individual’s actions cease functioning, and his actions become
controlled by the people occupying the senior position...The
disappearance of the sense of responsibility is the greatest
consequence of submission to authority...
Most of the subjects place their behavior in a large context of
undertakings, useful to society: the research of scientific truth. A
laboratory of psychology could clearly claim to this legitimacy,
and so inspire confidence in those who were invited to work.

317

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

An act such as the electrocution of a victim, which seems bad
when considered on its own, takes on a completely different
meaning when placed in this environment.
Morality does not disappear, but it is focused in a radically
different way: the subordinate person experiences shame and
pride depending on his good or bad execution of the act
commanded by the authority. Language offers a great number of
terms to designate this type of moral: loyalty, sense of duty,
discipline...
Such is without doubt the fundamental lesson of our study: the
ordinary people, by simply doing their job, and without any
particular hostility on their part, could become agents in a terribly
destructive process.
Moreover, even when the destructive effects of their work become
absolutely evident, and one asks them to execute actions
incompatible with the fundamental norms of morality, relatively
few people have the interior resources needed to resist authority.
It is a mortal fault which seems to be natural in most people, and
which, in the long run, leaves our species with only a mediocre
25
chance of survival.

It’s quite clear. Now we can understand why Jesus was crucified,
why millions of people died at the hands of the Inquisition, during
religious or civil wars, and in the Nazi massacres. It becomes easier to
understand how an honest greengrocer or banker could have been a
crucifier, or burn witches or become an SS soldier, sending women
and children to the death chambers. They all thought they were
doing something for the good of Humanity. The first ones were
getting rid of an “illuminated” man who wanted to overthrow their
traditions, and others felt that people who lived differently were
surely responsible for the bad crops or the plague or even the
318

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

economic crisis. The fact that ideas so stupid could germinate in the
brains of retarded people is forgivable. What is not, is that
governments could use the masses by utilizing such monstrous ideas
to motivate them and give them reasons to act.
The French leaders in Algeria acted along this same principle. They
forced their officers into torturing North-Africans under the pretense
of obtaining information useful to their country. Those officers who
did the torturing even considered that they were “sacrificing
themselves”, by acting this way, “bravely”, in the best interests of their
country.
Men of the Earth, be very vigilant and do not accomplish the
slightest action without asking yourself whether it is in contradiction
to your deep sense of respect for the human being. Refuse any
hierarchy implying a suppression of your responsibility for the actions
you carry out.
Every Nazi war criminal, while on trial, defended himself in good
faith, by claiming that he was only following orders. The man who
launched the bomb on Hiroshima was only following orders. In every
powerful country, there are people who are ready to launch nuclear
missiles in good faith and with a clear conscience, knowing that they
are only “doing their duty in executing the orders received”. They are
responsible for their actions! In every part of Nazi Germany, men,
women and children were tortured because people were following
orders, and according to them the only man responsible for all of this
would be Hitler. It would be much too easy if it were so! For example,
there are hundreds of nuclear missiles ready to be launched from
France and destined for other countries where thousands of women
and children are living, and if the massacre happened, would the only
man held to be responsible for it be the President of the Republic? Of
course not! Each man holding the power to kill others is personally
responsible for the utilization of this power. The man who lights the
crematorium furnace where children lie moaning, is more responsible
than the one who has given the order in the first place, just as the man
who delivers a bomb on a city is more responsible than the one who
made the decision.
319

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Each person is totally responsible for his actions and can never hide
behind the excuse that he was only following the orders which had
been given to him by his superiors.
If tomorrow I were to ask anyone of you to kill someone so that
our movement may progress faster, you must not do it. Better still, if
an Eloha were to ask you to kill another man, you should refuse to do
it, for it would probably be Satan who would be trying to prove to the
Eternals that all men are fundamentally bad.
All your actions should be based on a deep feeling of respect for the
life of others, their ideas, and their tastes. We fight ideologies without
ever using violent physical actions towards those who do not agree
with us.
Awaken the people around you, show them how to become
respectful of other people and how to refuse “deresponsibilisation”,
whose most dangerous propagator is the armed forces. Remember, 85
per cent in Germany and 60 per cent in the USA. You must use all
your energy so that tomorrow there is only 10 per cent of weakheaded people who would agree to perform violent actions ordered
by a political and military hierarchy.
Those who killed Jesus did it in all serenity. They were not
responsible; they were only following orders. Pontius Pilate himself
refused to endorse the responsibility for this crime, and he “washed
his hands” of the whole mess. He allowed the fanatics conditioned by
the rabbis, just like the SS, to crucify Jesus. If we were to ask all those
people if they feel responsible, none of them probably would. They
would all “wash their hands” like the Romans did. The rabbis would
claim that they followed the law and a chief, the fanatics as well, and
so perhaps we could hold one person responsible, even though the
whole of the population were the ones who committed the crime, the
crime of not intervening to prevent the assassination of an innocent
man.
Those who sent the first Christians to the lion’s den were also only
following orders. Those who burnt the witches, those who martyred
the protestants, as well as the Nazis at Auschwitz were also only
following orders, as was the pilot of the plane carrying the bomb over
320

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

Hiroshima, or the helicopter pilots who burnt the villages in
Vietnam.
We all have a choice at every moment of our lives: remain
responsible for our actions or become an irresponsible person. But
the irresponsible are still responsible for their actions, and will one
day have to account for them, for they are all committing crimes
against Humanity.
Learn this by heart if you must, but refuse to obey a hierarchy
which seeks to make you perform an action to which you would not
like to be held responsible. The armed forces are the most dangerous
example. It would be much better to die for having refused to kill,
than to kill under the pretext of obeying orders. He who executes
these monstrous orders is in fact more responsible than he who has
given them.
No cause would justify the imposition of pain on others. If the
survival of Humanity depended upon the pain inflicted on one man,
a single non-violent man, then it would be better to let Humanity
perish. Even more so if it means the survival of one’s country, or
rather a frontier arbitrarily traced on a globe which belongs to all
men.
Absolute respect for this principle is the only way to prevent the
imperceptible slipping of Humanity towards deresponsibilisation of
individuals.
The following sentence should be ever-present in our minds:
‘I am totally responsible for everything I do to others even if I am
ordered to do so.’
‘No cause could ever justify inflicting pain or death on a nonviolent person, and even if the survival of Humanity depended on it,
this would not justify an exception.’ This is the second sentence
which must be ever-present in our minds.
It is evident of course, that this rule does not apply in the case of
legitimate self-defense, which is explained in the messages and which
permits the possible overpowering, even by force, of one who tries to
use violence against your person or your loved ones. If a military man
was threatening the destruction of Humanity with nuclear missiles, it
321

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

would then be justifiable to overpower him by force, and even to
execute him if there were no other means available. Violence could
only be applied to those who threaten Humanity with violence, while
attempting to disarm them and render them powerless.
There is, however, a very good way to control those people who
have the power when obeying orders to launch nuclear missiles
capable of destroying cities in a few seconds. Their identity should be
made known on a precise list, and they should be made aware, that
in the case of the utilization of any such missiles, they would be
judged along with those who gave the orders. This is what we are
trying to do with Nazi criminals today; but if such a list had existed,
with similar dispositions before 1939, many people would have
thought twice before torturing their innocent victims.
Non-violent civilians should have the right to place neutral
observers among the military forces, to note down the identities of
those who carry out cruel acts using the excuse that they were obeying
orders, so that inhuman missions are not carried out solely on the
pretext that the order has been given. There is policing of the police,
but there is no policing of the armies. They are free to command,
knowing full well that while at war, a soldier could be shot to death
for refusing to obey an order.
Until the Earth gets rid of the armies and the wars, the neutral
observers would oppose the execution of soldiers who have refused
orders that could qualify as crimes against Humanity. The UN could
impose these observers on all the armies of the world, and then a
military man could not be sentenced until his disobedience is judged
by a council of these observers, to investigate if the order which he
refused to obey could have constituted a crime against Humanity.
Because it is in this way that people are forced to execute orders of
which they disapprove; they are afraid of being punished if they don’t
obey. They prefer to kill innocent people or to torture them, rather
than be imprisoned or killed themselves. Refuse to bend to authority!
Be the real heroes of humanity by preferring to be imprisoned or
killed yourselves rather than laying into innocent people. When you
have motivated millions of people so that they act in this way, those
322

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

giving the orders will see an army of people refusing to carry out the
crimes which they ordered, and then it will be time to punish those
who dare give such orders, hoping they will be listened to.
Men have had enough energy to refuse non-unionized work, like
before 1936, where the all-powerful bosses exploited humans like
cattle, even if it meant death for many of them at the hands of a
policeman, so-called “protector of the law”. It is possible to find the
same energy to fight the last form of tyranny imposed on the
inhabitants of this world: militarism.
Many people with powers and honors are disturbed by what I have
to say. Unfortunately for them, they are too late in noticing my
presence. If I was worried in the first two years of my mission, I am
now no longer worried. In the beginning, if I had been sent to jail, I
could not have carried out my mission on Earth. Fortunately, the
powers at hand smiled when they saw this long-haired young man
who spoke of flying-saucers and Martians with pink antennae... Now
they understand that the contents of the messages from our creators
are revolutionary, questioning and uprooting everything which they
have used to gain power: religion, politics, the armed forces, work,
the family, the country, etc. So now they are trying to stop me by
using their “justice” as they used it against my brother Jesus.
There is always a justice to justify the worst injustices. The first
Christians were sentenced by official tribunals, the same for the
burning of witches, or the sending of Jewish people to extermination
camps, or the Soviet dissidents to psychiatric hospitals or labor camps;
all those people were “non-conformists”, they were upsetting because
they refused to be “normal” and conform. Unfortunately, they have
woken up too late. Even if I were put in one of their prisons, there
would still be thousands of messengers like you in many countries of
the world, to carry the messages of our creators. I am no longer alone,
I am 3,000 of you. I would then enter their cell with a smile, thinking
of you, who, around the world, will be other Raels working together
so that the embassy can be built, so that Humanity enters the Golden
Age.
323

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

In my dungeon, I would feel the happiness of someone who has
fulfilled his mission, that for which he has been created, and even
though he has been put out of action, everything he has started
continues to advance without him. Also hoping that my father who
art in heaven will realize that I am no longer needed on this Earth,
and that he will allow me to join my brothers, the prophets, on the
planet of the Eternals.
This thought alone is sufficient to make me want to sing the glory
of our fathers, to say again the words that men have been repeating
without being able to understand: “Alleluia! Alleluia!” which means:
“praised be Yahweh” in Hebrew. Yes, praised be Yahweh who has
given me the strength to carry out my mission until the end.
My Raelian brothers, I am now relaying to you the torch so that
you can accomplish your mission. Even if the time when the truth
will be triumphant is not here yet, you can rest assured that it is not
very far, and you will have the opportunity to live it. It is written in
The Bible: ‘This generation will not pass that everything shall be
revealed.’
These words are addressed to those who will have the opportunity
to live this Age of Apocalypse, which we entered in 1945. You are this
generation! Either you will know the Golden Age on Earth because
of your efforts which have contributed to world peace and the
awakening of Mankind, or Humanity will destroy itself and you will
know the Golden Age amongst the great prophets who are already on
the planet of the Eternals.
The Elohim are counting on each and every one of you to shed the
light. My last word will again be an etymological demystification:
“Amen”, which means in Hebrew: “So be it!”
And to those of you who are reading this book without having
complete knowledge of the messages from our creators, be sure to
read the other books as soon as possible, and then join us in making
Humanity aware of them and in building the residence in which the
Elohim will officially contact the governments of the Earth, where
they will come in the company of the great prophets, Moses, Jesus,
Buddha, Mohammed and others as the scriptures have announced.
324

A N ATHEIST R ELIGION - D ERESPONSIBILISATION

Then write to me. I will personally answer your letter and indicate
when and where you can have your cellular plan transmitted, your
first action which recognizes the Elohim as our creators, the name
and address of your regional Guide, and the dates when the next
Raelian courses of awakening will be held, which could make you a
Guide, an efficient messenger of our atheistic religion of the Infinite,
of blossoming, and of love for Humanity.
Take your pen. Don’t be the spectator of your life anymore!
Become actors on the stage of this sad, grey, and resigned everyday life
that is yours, to enlighten it with a thousand shimmering colors of
absolute consciousness.
Take a pen and paper and write to me very simply, and modestly
with your everyday words, tell me if the discovery of the truth has
been a shock for you. Follow the impulse which came up inside of
you and which said: ‘Ah! It’s not bad, but what will I be able to
change, I am only one person, and then, what will the neighbors say?’
Don’t hide your head in the sand, come out of the fragile shell that
society has given you so freely! Your head is already sticking out, and
it feels marvellous, but you are afraid that this will only be another
illusion, a very short-lived pleasure, which would only bring you
problems afterwards. Untrue! Live out completely the fantastic
exaltation which you have felt. You will enter a new world, in which
you will meet hundreds of people like you, who have read the
messages in only one night, and who like you, have hesitated in
getting involved in the diffusion of the messages. These people will
help you by explaining how they have progressed, and you will find
yourself filled with happiness, while seeing yourself through them,
and while talking freely about your anxieties without the worry of
being made a fool, since you are assured that the people around you
share your conception of the universe: the conception that you had
within you, although you never expressed your thoughts, for fear of
being ridiculed.
Peter, one of our Guides, once said: ‘One does not become a
Raelian: one discovers that one always has been, when one discovers
the messages.’
325

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

If you have discovered that you are a Raelian, then I am waiting for
your letter, and the Elohim are waiting for you to drop it in the
mailbox! My address is:
Rael,
International Raelian Movement,
Case Postale 225, CH–1211,
Geneva 8, Switzerland.
or email me at: headquarters@rael.org.

326

4
COMMENTARIES AND
TESTIMONIALS OF RAELIANS

Raelism Through the Eyes of Science
MARCEL TERUSSE – Chemical Engineer & Raelian Guide
1: EVOLUTION, OBSCURANTISM AND
THE NEO-DARWINIAN MYTH
Many of us were taught the theory of evolution at school and even
suffered its influence which permeated from our history lessons to
philosophy and even religion. To quote Jean Rostand: ‘We have been
impregnated, saturated and conditioned with this idea... we learned
this on school benches by repeating parrot fashion that life evolved
and that organisms transformed themselves into others.’
Unfortunately, even those who didn’t go to school and undergo this
spoon-fed learning process or those that did but didn’t understand
the theory, still believe in it more fanatically than those who did. In
the end, this continual indoctrination, generation after generation,
must inevitably bias our minds, especially since the enormous
quantities of evidence against it is never presented to the pupils.
How many people would have the courage to be seen as heretics if
they dared question evolution when so many well known scientists,
professors and clergy state it as fact?
This is a big problem especially for those who envisage following a
scientific career, but luckily for them, some clear sighted minds do
327

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

exist within the scientific community, such as the above mentioned
eminent biologist Jean Rostand. In his book, Evolution, written in
1960, he wrote:
...are we really as sure as would certainly be the wish of the neoDarwinians, that the problem of evolution is really solved? The
mutations that we are familiar with and which they wish to
consider responsible for the coming to being of the whole of life
on Earth are not more than organic deprivations, deficiencies and
losses of pigments or appendices, or doubling of pre-existing
organs. In any case, they never bring anything really new and
original to the organic layout, and nothing that we believe might
be the beginning of a new organ or the start of a new function.
No, decidedly, I cannot admit that these mistakes of heredity
could build the whole of the living world in all its richness, its
structural delicacies and astonishing adaptations, even with the
competitive factor of natural selection and the help of immense
durations.

Many experiments have been designed in the last decade to
understand the mechanisms of mutations, and again the same
conclusions are reached.
One of the pioneers in this field of study was 1946 Nobel prize
winner H.J. Muller, who concentrated particularly on the common
fruit fly, Drosophila Melanogatser. He concluded that ‘it is so rare
that a mutation allows survival that we can consider them as
disadvantageous.’
Almost all mutations, including both those occurring in the wild
and those provoked in the laboratory, result in hereditary illnesses,
deteriorations of survival value and genetic monstrosities. The
chromosome plan of living organisms is extremely complex, and any
modification will inevitably result in its disorganization.
In the laboratory, we have been able to cause hens’ necks and even
whole bodies to have no feathers or to change the color of insects’
eyes, wings, posteriors, etc. We have even slightly altered other
328

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - R AELISM T HROUGH T HE E YES O F S CIENCE

organs, but in the natural environment, not one mutation was
advantageous to ensure its survival. An accident of this sort can never
increase organization but will result only in damage, in the same way
as throwing a watch on the ground can never increase its precision,
nor can hitting a computer with a spanner endow it with extra
calculating properties. And the time factor will not change anything
since what was impossible yesterday will also be impossible today.
The mutation itself always stays within the confines of the species.
For example, among the innumerable mutations provoked in
Drosophila, not one produced a different species or anything
different from its ancestors. The flies’ size, color and morphology may
vary but not even a series of mutations has ever produced a new
organism with attributes that never existed before. Living cells are
composed of extremely complex molecules, themselves made up of
many combinations of atoms; so how is it possible that these delicate
structures spontaneously form their constituent parts, randomly
scattered around? Inanimate matter doesn’t seek to complicate itself,
but on the contrary tends towards disorganization and stability. It is
no use saying that it will happen someday, since with time comes
decomposition and disintegration.
The tendency that every organic structure has to revert to
disorganization is spelt out in the thermodynamic law which defines
the function of entropy. There is never a gain in order without the
intervention of an outside force. Therefore, inanimate matter
containing no energy or movement will always stay inert in the
absence of any guiding hand to organize and direct it. Thus the
theory of evolution lies in direct contradiction with the law of
entropy.
The methods that have been used for building the theory of
evolution are totally unscientific, and will continue to be so for as
long as the transformists don’t consider objectively the evidence and
continue to force the facts.
True advances will happen only when glory seeking, petty arguing,
fear of reputation and egocentrism disappear to allow honest
329

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

conclusions to be made, based on solid facts instead of preconceived
ideas.
Life on Earth is not the result of random chance, but is the fruit of
outside intervention, of the Elohim, our creators.
2: A NEW HYPOTHESIS FOR THE HISTORY
OF HUMANITY
When the CIA, the Central Intelligence Agency of America, gave the
Hudson Institute the task of studying the world distribution of
natural resources such as petrol, gas and coal, Professor Nebring, who
was put in charge, discovered a rather strange phenomenon.
He put together the continents as they would have been at the end
of the geological tertiary period before they split up, and found that
all the main oil springs such as those in the Arctic and Alaska, the
asphalt sands of Alberta, the bitumen schists of Colorado, Mexico,
and Venezuela, the heavy oils of Orenoc, Nigeria, South Sahara,
Lybia, Arabia, Iran and Siberia all formed a circle.
Present studies on petrol reveal that it is the result of what used to
be living organisms, such as plants, animals, etc., which have
decomposed in anaerobic conditions, that is to say, in the absence of
air, where special bacteria reduce and transform their proteins and
fats. Dead trees are the main source of these proteins and fats, but
what usually happens when one of them dies is that normal airbreathing bacteria decompose it and recycle it into the forest food
chain without producing petrol, so for the above to occur the trees
must be buried straight away to prevent access of air.
But when oil fields are examined, one finds that they are extremely
deep (2,000 meters deep in northern France) and cover considerable
areas (18,000 kms in the Appalachians, USA), so the actual volume
of material which must have been brutally buried all in one go was
enormous.
No theory up to now can account for these facts satisfactorily, but
we Raelians hold the key to this enigma.
330

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - R AELISM T HROUGH T HE E YES O F S CIENCE

When the Elohim decided to destroy their bases, their laboratories
and all that they had created on Earth, they must have used extremely
powerful methods of destruction, which, as well as breaking up this
original continent and sending each respective fragment drifting
outwards from the centre of the shock, must also have swept the
whole land surface. Since the impact must have spread outwards from
the bombs’ point of impact, all the living matter including immense
forests, animals and even Man would have been buried deep,
immediately and all together under tons of earth in a ring shape,
circling the central explosion.
This would explain how extremely large volumes of living matter
were buried quickly enough to provide anaerobic conditions in the
large circular formation which intrigued Nebring so much when he
pieced back together again all the fragments of what was once our
unique single continent.
During the time when the Elohim built the first continent until
they broke it up, erosion would have accumulated sediment rich in
animal matter such as corals and shells into the oceans, especially
around the edge of the continent. As what later became the North
and South American continental plates scraped along the ocean bed,
all the sediment built up to form the Andes and the Rocky mountain
ranges.
The same for the Indian sub-continent which broke off from
Africa, and sliding northeast, trapped in its path enormous amounts
of material which we now know as the Himalayas. The Antarctic
continent drifting south became covered with a huge coating of ice,
preserving until today traces of tropical vegetation. Meanwhile
Australia, part of Africa and India, went southeast, accumulating
along its edge sediment which was to form the Australian Great
Dividing Range.
The destruction was cataclysmic and provoked not only large
geological changes, but also climatic ones, obliterating innumerable
life forms, burying them under layers of sand, lime, earth and a sort
of muddy ice which preserved them until this day and from which
331

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

they periodically emerged, released from their frozen coffin of the
greater north Siberia.
Only a small handful of humans were protected in the ark during
the “flood”. Upon their return they found the continent completely
unrecognizable and ravaged by the destruction, the geological
upheavals having resulted in parts of the surface being decapitated
and the appearance of cracks in the crust layer causing volcanic
activity.
It is easy to see how the story of the unique continent breaking up
into many fragments ‘where there was once land but now is water’
and vice versa became distorted into the legends of Atlantis or Mu,
where a continent is reputed to have disappeared into the sea. In fact,
it did not sink, it merely moved aside.
Not all the living organisms were re-created after the flood, some
considered to be monstrous and detrimental to the ecological
balance, such as the large reptiles and dinosaurs, were left out, which
explains the sudden and simultaneous disappearance of these
antediluvian beasts.
After the “flood”, the Elohim cohabited with the humans of Earth,
and the traces of their presence which we can still find scattered all
over the world are post diluvian.
Let us learn to open our eyes, we have everything around us to
enable us to understand. We are in the age of the Apocalypse, the age
when we can once again hope to meet our creators, the Elohim.
3: TRANSMISSION OF THE CELLULAR PLAN
IN THE LIGHT OF SCIENCE
So far today, spectral studies investigating the relationship between
matter and energy have allowed us to achieve a certain understanding
of the structure and make-up of molecules. Although matter may
appear to our human eyes to be homogeneous, be it in gaseous, liquid
or solid state, it is in fact made up of many building blocks called
molecules, which themselves are composed of atoms.
332

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - R AELISM T HROUGH T HE E YES O F S CIENCE

An atom can be compared to a miniature solar system with a
positive nucleus in the middle, around which electrons rotate, each
capable of spinning on themselves, just as the Earth does on its
journey around the sun. The electrons’ movement is described by
four quantum numbers (principle, secondary, magnetic and spin).
Wave mechanics associated a particular vibration to all moving
particles, the motion of which can be predicted by Shrodinger’s
equation.
An atom can only emit or absorb energy of particular frequencies.
This is accompanied by a spectrum of separate and distinct radiations
which are related directly to the energy state of the atom. Therefore,
every type of atom has its own specific type of atomic spectrum.
The nuclear magnetic resonance can also provide detailed
information on the nature of the bond holding the atoms together
forming the molecule.
Within the molecule the atoms will also vibrate relative to each
other. If there are only two, there is only one fundamental frequency
following the joining at the two centers of gravity of the two nuclei,
and it is, therefore, linear. Molecules composed of more atoms will
have a larger number of fundamentals.
Atoms can also rotate around their own axes. Their vibrational and
rotational energies can vary only in a discontinuous way. The jump
from one energy level to another is done either by absorbing or
emitting energy. Every chemical reaction is based on such energy
changes, and the emission resulting from these matter
transformations can be measured and recorded as “rotational and
electro-vibrational molecular spectrums”. Every molecule of our body
is vibrating in such a way and is, therefore, emitting a whole host of
vibrations which at first sight might appear to be a huge cacophony.
Thus the human body is an electric and electromagnetic wave
emitter.
Today, our technology does not yet allow us to record such
phenomena on an organism as complex as the human being. Neither
are our methods of analysis fine enough to distinguish the emission
333

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

coming from a particular molecule and that of the background noise,
but with time...
Remember that Hertz discovered the waves which are named after
him only in the 1920s, and nuclear magnetic resonance has been
known only since 1946, so where will we be in 50, 100 or in 1,000
years? Let us not forget that the Elohim are 25,000 years in advance
of us.
The principle of baptism, the transmission of one’s cellular plan, is
today understandable to us, and this ceremony is scientifically
explained as follows: every individual has a cellular chromosomic
plan, specific to him, which vibrates with its own electromagnetic
spectral emission.
A Guide, whose own frequency has been noted by the Elohim
during his or her initiation, can act as a relay between the new
Raelian and the Elohim’s satellite which records every human’s
thought.
Water is used between the new Raelian’s forehead and the Guide’s
hands so as to establish a good electrical contact, and the Raelian
baptism indicates to the Elohim that the Raelian has both understood
the messages and lives by them. It is an act of recognition.

Impressions of a ‘Priest’
VICTOR LEGENDRE – ex-Roman Catholic Priest
I was in Europe on holiday when I learned of the messages given by
the extra-terrestrials (Elohim) to Claude Vorilhon, “Rael”. I had
already visited France, Spain and Italy, since June 10th, 1976, when
I laid hands on the first message, The Book Which Tells The Truth on
June 30th and a few days later on July 2nd, I picked up The ExtraTerrestrials Took Me To Their Planet. I found the first book in Geneva
and the second one in Clermont Ferrand in France.
334

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - I MPRESSIONS O F A P RIEST

Words could hardly describe what I felt while reading these two
messages: surprise mixed with admiration and fear, a shock of joy!
This is a very poor description. I was transported with joy into a state
of well-being or an indescribable euphoria and a profound sense of
peace, with a new outlook. No! A renewed outlook on everything. If
the word resentment (from the French word “ressentiment” also
meaning to feel again) did not have this pejorative sense, I would use
it to explain the various feelings which I was living so intensely.
Two days before my departure from Europe, I had visited a
musician friend of mine who had asked me to bring back The Book
Which Tells The Truth, as he could not find it in Canada, since he did
not know who the editor was. He made me listen to a recorded
interview which the CBC International had released in Europe, and
which had been transmitted several times during the 1975-76 season.
I had only a vague idea of the messages then; and to please my friend,
I had promised to bring him back this book.
Before his waiting period was rewarded on my return on the
following July 10th, it was I who had been rewarded and beyond all
my expectations! It was as if I had discovered a precious pearl,
without having really looked for it! I am speaking of course of what
the messages contained. It was only upon my return that I had started
to investigate this message intelligently, if I may say so; a little “at
random”, I tried to understand the essence of the messages. I looked
at the biblical writings which I had studied in theology on my way to
priesthood; then in the Kabala wich was unfamiliar to me, except for
a few Hebrew words which I had learned in theology; also in the
history of religions, particularly in the history of Christianity; and
finally in the scientific field. I formed my opinion based on this
research. What was it that struck me most in these messages? What
impressed me the most?
Without too many comments, I will outline the strong points, in
a synthesis of my impressions, although these points should be
discussed at greater length:
The original Bible, written in Hebrew, speaks of Elohim, which
means literally “those who came from the sky”. Elohim is a word
335

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

which has been unjustly translated by the word God in current bibles.
So there is no immaterial, supernatural or almighty God; but there
are Elohim, constantly present in The Bible, and who, among other
things, have created life in a laboratory, including human life,
through inert chemicals associated with DNA. Therefore, the
Elohim, or Extra-terrestrials, are clearly present at different epochs for
different civilizations. Thus we are far from this narrow-minded
conception which says ‘the extra-terrestrials and The Bible should not
be mixed.’
There is no soul which leaves the body after death, but there is the
genetic code which is the principle of life.
The title of the first message was announced in Ezekiel 2:9-10, in
Revelation 5:1 and in Daniel 10:21, ‘But I will reveal to you that
which is written in the book of truth’.
And Daniel 12:4, ‘And thou Daniel keep secret these words and
seal the book until the time of the end. Many will look here and
there, and knowledge will increase.’
The notion of the infinitely great and the infinitely small, the
awakening of the mind to the infinite, is where truth resides.
Evolution by chance, or successive random events is a myth. On the
contrary, evolution resides first in the minds of our creators.
No one can belong to someone else; you cannot be owned by
someone, whatever the relationship, be it in work, marriage, or any
other situation.
The affirmation and development of basic human objectives which
each one of us is called upon to follow in his or her life is: think,
create and expand!
The solutions proposed to solve the great problems of humanity:
among other things, selective democracy or geniocracy which would
apply to humanitarianism; the genius being the raw material of
humanity; the procedure to follow to create a geniocratic world
government; the creation of robots to abolish manual labor; a unique
world currency until money is suppressed totally; a universal second
language, each region conserving its mother-tongue; the abolition of
military service and the placing of career soldiers at the service of
336

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - I MPRESSIONS O F A P RIEST

world peace: we cannot continue to search for “peace and security” at
the same time, as Paul of Tarsus said in Chapter 5 of his first Epistle
to the Thessalonians.
The perfect meeting of science and religion in our epoch, the age
of Apocalypse (or revelation), where the two blend so perfectly: all the
religious writings, notably The Bible, have announced the return of
the great prophets – nearly 40 in all – in the company of our creators,
the Elohim.
When I had finished reading these first two messages, I felt vividly
inside me the hypocrisy of Christians who pray only from their lips,
while the precept of loving their neighbors is almost always forgotten.
I felt this temporal and spiritual domination of the Church by the
money and the riches which it has accumulated.
This domination is maintained and encouraged by the political
powers which see only advantages in it; I felt this mystification which
only makes people dormant; we are far from the vigilance
recommended by Jesus, to read the signs of the time, and recognize
them when they happen; but it is the cult of the traditions which has
made people blind. I remember those words from the book of
Ecclesiastes, 7:10, ‘Do not say: how is it that the past is better than the
present, for it is not wise to pose such a question.’ To me it felt that
this guilt of conscience was accentuated by the idea that Man is a
sinner, that Man is imperfect, explained by this rejection of
intelligence, i.e. Man is told to believe without understanding, and
maintained by the idea that sexual pleasure or even sensuality is
contemptible.
I have linked the signs of the time announced in the religious
writings with our epoch where we see them happen. This epoch is
ours, the Age of the Apocalypse or the Age of the Revelation, when
everything can be understood. The signs of the time reveal the
original mystery in the light of scientific progress. Anyone who
searches in The Bible in particular, and compares the predictions with
the achievements of our scientific age, unveils, ascertains and
understands only that which is “the foundation of the Earth”, and
that which has been kept hidden since the “foundation of the world”.
337

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

Allow me to enumerate some of these signs with their
accomplishments: Man will be equal to the Elohim (creators of life);
the deaf will hear; the blind will see; the crippled will regain the use
of their limbs (electronic prosthesis); Man will have his voice carried
to the four corners of the Earth (telecommunications and
radiotelephony); the healing of poisoned people (antidotes, antivenum serums); the healing of sick people by the imposition of the
hands (development of surgery); the prolongation of life; the people
of David find their country again (the creation of the State of Israel);
numerous signs in the sky (UFOs); thousands of false prophets trying
to plunge Mankind into fanaticism, obscurantism and mysticism
(religions and sects).
Even if the Roman Catholic Church does not recognize me as a
priest, since I have adhered to the Raelian Movement, I nevertheless
remain a priest. I was entrusted with a fantastic mission, the
spreading of the messages to the greatest number of people possible;
I am still a “priest” since, like Rael, I am the messenger of those in
whom I have always believed (the Elohim) while only now
understanding truly their work, the creation of Man and the mission
of Jesus. I am still a “priest”, but I am vigilant; since I have opened
my mind, I have also become a “mind opener”, and no longer the one
who puts human consciences to sleep; I am and I will remain a
“priest”, that is to say a guide for Humanity on the path of peace and
universal love.

338

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - Y ES ...I A M R AELIAN

Yes... I am Raelian
MARCEL TERRUSSE – Chemical Engineer and Raelian Guide
Yes, I am Raelian, a disciple of the religion of the infinity of time and
space, a child of the Earth who has rediscovered traces of our fathers
of the stars, and who is trying to make known to the rest of
Humanity this fabulous story of ours.
Unfortunately, I believe that one does not become Raelian, one day
one discovers the messages and one finds an echo of one’s own
thoughts, of one’s own preoccupations.
Some day or another, dizzy before the unfathomable whirlpool of
time and space, we have all tried to dissipate the mystery of our origin
and the uncertainty of our future. The messages have provided me
with the answer to this preoccupation.
Of course, for someone who had received a technical and scientific
education, certain passages in the messages do not appear very
“orthodox” and not very consistent with traditional teachings. But let
us apply the advice of Montaigne ‘and make all pass through the sieve
and lodge nothing in our mind by mere authority and confidence.’
If we try to sift all the elements of the messages by critical analysis,
we are soon conscious that we are dealing with an extremely solid
monument.
I have always had the intuition that there existed a link between all
the more or less fabulous stories that come to us from ancient times,
and that there exists in each of them some gold nuggets in a jumble
of nonsense...
I started to research Arian’s clew, and I had the confirmation that
the contacts with the Elohim had always existed. We have found
traces in the myths and souvenirs of ancient civilizations:
• Greek mythology, which relates a whole series of gods,
demigods, and giants of ancient times; Mahabarata, mythical
epic poem of India, with its two parts: Vedas and Ramayana
• The Epic of Gilgamesh, Sumarian-Babylonian
339

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

• Kojiki of Japan, which reported that which happened at
the beginning
• The Popol Vuh and The Chronical of Akakor in Latin
America
• And nearer to us, The Book of Enoch, The Kabala, and
The Bible
• Some physical traces can be seen on the plain of Nazca
(engravings), at Baalbeck, and certainly at Tiahuanaco,
Easter Island (Ile de Paques), and in many other places
throughout the world.
We have at our disposal all the pieces of the puzzle to reconstruct
the story of our origin.
In the reading of the messages, I have certainly had occasion to
pose some questions on the apparent contradictions which could
have existed between certain cited facts and common knowledge. It
appears that we make what we consider to be scientific achievements
based on frail and contestable hypotheses, and I find insurmountable
contradictions in today’s scientific teachings.
I have always thought that all the phenomena of nature susceptible
of being understood in the universe are coherent, and that they all
depend on one another in a more or less complex fashion.
The development of a more and more abstract mathematical tool
has orientated physics on a path which is strangely logical, but
outside of material realities.
It is thus that Einstein postulated that the speed of light was an
insurmountable limit of all speeds in the universe, committing the
monumental error of taking as principle that space is uniformly
empty and identical to itself in every part of the cosmos, apart from
the stars and the planets.
Beyond the clouds which encircle our planet, the density of the
gaseous molecules diminish progressively with altitude, until they
attain a level which we call “emptiness”.
But the interstellar “emptiness” is pervaded by waves of every kind:
x-rays, infrared, radio waves, etc. So all undulation implies the
340

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - Y ES ...I A M R AELIAN

existence of an environment which undulates, the interstellar space is
not empty as appearances would have us believe, but full of a
substance capable of undulating: a sub-quantum composed of
infinitesimal particles compared with the size of the atoms we know.
Undulation implies movement, and movement, energy. In a
century where we believe that the equivalent of mass and energy is
absolutely true, it is not logical to deny the existence of a mass of
interstellar and intergalactic space.
Space is heterogeneous and the local characteristic of this space
depends on the energetic gradient in the part under consideration.
The Earth and the solar system bathe in a diffuse energetic
environment of “sub-quantal” particles whose pressure is responsible
for what we call the forces of attraction.
The gravitational space is comparable with a gaseous atmosphere,
similar to the aerial atmosphere.
The speed of propagation of waves is a function of the local density
and not a constant, as the relativists believe, so all the cosmic
distances must be recalculated.
All the distances in light years calculated by the traditional
methods are overestimated. The stars that surround us are much
nearer than we believe. Moreover, the development of theories which
confuse the dimensions of space and time are ridiculous.
The factor of time, which is parasitic to all the formulations and
equations of physics, is an arbitrary element.
Time has no existence in itself; the notion that we have is
subjective, and it is derived from our own biological and mental
organization. We project it in the exterior world, draw an irresistible
illusion of an “absolute universal time”.
‘Scientific time is conventional; it is based on physical standards
susceptible of being coordinated under different forms, in an
arbitrary way.’
Our conception of the cosmos is fundamentally false, together
with our philosophic concepts.
I find everywhere around me confirmation of the messages. It
suffices to open our eyes to understand this fabulous story of the
341

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

coming of the Elohim to Earth, and scientific creation of life in
laboratories, which we ourselves will soon repeat.
No doubt my background as a chemist has made me familiar with
the affinity existing between chemical elements and biological
structures participating in the mechanisms of life. But even for an
ordinary person with a curious mind, the rapid reading of popular
scientific reviews allows us to foresee the direction towards which the
biochemical and medical research is going.
Become conscious that we have synthesized certain genes by
combining nucleotides; that segments of molecules of DNA had been
implanted in the interior of bacteria chromosomes; that the transfer
of genetic material from one organism to another is becoming
increasingly familiar to us...
Look at the direction taken by the researchers of the last Nobel
prize winners...
The understanding of the molecular structure and the mechanisms
which they control open up the possibility of regeneration of tissues,
and the replacement of organs, and of the creation of new animal
species, and with time, of the synthesis of humans in our image, and
the cycle starts again.
The study of the mechanisms of the coding of information in the
molecules of DNA will lead us to understand and to utilize the
memory substances in our brain - substances that could be
transferred from one individual to another. Become aware of the
biological revolution in progress, and how the consequences of which
will create a fundamental change in the whole of our social and
political structures.
Wake up, this is not science-fiction.
To be Raelian does not mean to be secluded in a “self-centered”
group always staring at their belly buttons, persuaded they have
found the truth, feeling superior in I don’t know what; the Raelian
Movement is for me just the opposite to a sect.
Our proceedings have an ambitious goal, but they progress with
humility, being conscious that Humanity is penalized by aggression,
pride, vanity and egotism.
342

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - Y ES ...I A M R AELIAN

I love the philosophy of our existence developed by the Movement,
because it seeks the complete expansion of individuals. It teaches us
to listen to that which we have in the depths of ourselves and to reveal
the best in us.
Life is everywhere in the universe, but our life is unique, and it is
important to make a success of it: ‘Life is a lost blessing if one has not
lived as one wished to’ (Eminescu).
I have found a blossoming through the in-depth study of the
messages, a better understanding of others and of myself, and they
have allowed me to become more conscious of our degree of
solidarity.
The philosophy of the Movement is a philosophy of the love of life
and of its creators, a tolerant and pacific philosophy, which tends to
remove guilt from sensuality and to disengage from all the taboos,
prohibitions and inhibitions connected with sexuality.
The adhesion of the Movement is not a brigading, towards which
I have always had a great distrust, but a voluntary and enriching act
which has brought me great pleasure, by the personal blossoming that
I obtained, and the joy in the diffusion of the messages around me.
I believe that we must not commit the error – that which happened
with Christ – of attributing more importance to the messenger than
to the message. The essential thing is becoming conscious that the
extra-terrestrials have always played a role in our history, and wish
nothing better than to renew that contact today.
The past history of Humanity shows us that each stage of its
development necessitated an uprooting and renewing of fundamental
beliefs in our scientific, social, philosophic and religious conceptions.
Unfortunately, ‘a new scientific truth does not usually impose itself
by convincing its adversaries; its triumph results by progressive
extinction of its adversaries, and the appearance of a new generation
for whom this truth had always been familiar’ (M. Planck).
I believe that we should help people to stand on their own two feet
and to get rid of the crutches that are the beliefs and religions; we
should seek to dissipate obscurantism by raising the level of
consciousness. For, if over the centuries, religion has asked and
343

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

sometimes imposed on the faithful to “believe” the mysteries and the
most delirious fables, today our history is understandable, and it is up
to us to open our eyes and minds to prepare our future.
In the present is contained the beginnings of our future. Humanity
is at the eve of its birth and perhaps of its death, and those who have
not understood the meaning of the word apocalypse will nevertheless
perhaps be right.
We, Raelians, participate in the awakening of Humanity and in the
development of the cosmic consciousness.
That is the direction of my involvement in this ambitious work,
which is the preparation of Humanity for the welcoming of our
creators, the Elohim.

The Consecration of My Priesthood
YVAN GIROUX – ex-Roman Catholic Priest and Professor of Catechism.
I would like it to be known that I became interested in everything
related to Man and God at the very early age of 12 years old. I saw
them as two similarities, Man and “God”, constituted from infinity,
and constituting infinity. I then became really interested in “God”
and my relation to Him. I was soon led to contemplation, to
mysticism, as if I had been trying to escape this Earth to reach the
heavens.
So I read, asked questions, researched and meditated. I undertook
long years of study to go even deeper into the subject. I studied the
humanities, philosophy, theology, and finally, “religiology”, because I
had faith in Man (I still have faith) and his intelligence.
Since I am a complete and total person, I searched for a family
where I could dedicate my whole life to this “God” whom I was
forever questioning, whom I looked for, whom I materialized in
meditation and contemplation, this “God” with whom I had lengthy
344

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - T HE C ONSECRATION O F M Y P RIESTHOOD

conversations, as if he were an old friend. But I kept this part a secret
because I could have been thought of as crazy.
I found a religious community of fathers to which I devoted six
years of my life, as a student and pastor (seminarist), and I spent
marvellous moments of discovery and formation within this
community. But I soon became conscious of something which I
found superficial. There was something which did not seem to satisfy
my most profound aspirations.
I enjoyed praying (I still enjoy praying) as the contact with my
creators, my source of infinity. I was thought to be mystical by many
people, but I saw the father of Jesus as being human just like Jesus
when he said ‘my father who art in Heaven...’ My thought of there
being more than one creator was then true. Furthermore, I had
researched The Bible and had come to the conclusion that Jesus was
not God, and I was impassioned by an aspect of theology, “the
theologians of the death of God” or “theology of the death of God”.
In some way I was an atheist, but I was afraid of admitting this truth.
I detected in these schools of theological thinking another form of
mystification.
I could not find complete satisfaction to my numerous questions,
interrogations on Man and his faith, on man in his religious and
social involvement, in this Church that I found to be out of phase,
even false, at times.
Nevertheless, I worked in the midst of the “Church” said to be of
Christ, in the numerous movements which it includes, all the while
specializing in religious science (religiology) to search even deeper.
My studies impelled me to work within my environment, to
question it as well as shake it. I still felt misunderstood.
This research, which took me three more years, led me to a sort of
emptiness, a sort of sadness. I could not tolerate so much mysticism,
so much blindness. I liked to study, but I had reached the point where
I could no longer feel a solid base. I felt that the slow process of
reasoning used to justify some pastoral and ecclesiastical structures,
mysticism and obscurantism, was irrelevant, out of phase, and I was
rejecting it more and more. Those people who did not share my views
345

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

thought of me as being critical and superficial. They accommodated
themselves with banal ideas in their faith and in their religion, and
still do the same today.
It was then that I decided to take a step backward for a year and
search for the truth within my “soul”. I was still teaching, but I did
not get involved in any movements. I questioned Jesus, and I felt that
I was starting to see the light.
On November 9th 1976, I attended a conference at the Plateau
Auditorium, in Montreal, given by Claude Vorilhon, “Rael”. On that
night, I really felt that my years of study had not been in vain. I
understood many things, among others that I had always been an
“atheist” deep down inside of me, and that I was profoundly religious
as well. I was interested in the matter; I loved Man; prayer had kept
me in constant communication with this group of extra-terrestrials,
our creators, the Elohim, who I de-mystified more and more each
day. I understood everything in a flash. I was happy; I recognized in
Rael, Jesus speaking in his own era. Something happened to me,
awakened me, enlightened me, I felt drawn to him; in 90 minutes,
everything inside of me was reconstructed again; everything was
being connected; everything was becoming harmonious again, and it
has never ceased since. I was enraptured, and it showed.
After all, from his mouth I had heard a truth, so simply, so clearly,
and with such evidence, this truth that I had searched for so many
years the hard way. It was as if a mental block had been removed in
an instant.
I had gone to the lecture with some friends, but as was confirmed
later, it had not triggered such a reaction in them. Just the same, they
had noticed a change in me that night, and they noticed it even more
afterwards. It was as if the messages had provoked a “click” inside me,
but they would not admit to what they were seeing. I became silent,
happy and luminous. I could hear them trying to reject, to destroy by
mystical reasoning, this beautiful, simple and liberating truth, which
had become soft music to my ears, this good news in all its plenitude,
in its entirety, in its clearness. They rejected Rael and his messages
346

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - T HE C ONSECRATION O F M Y P RIESTHOOD

from the Elohim in the same way that people had tried to reject Jesus
and his message.
Those few moments with Rael had revealed the synthesis of more
than 12 years of research, analysis, commitment, sufferings and the
gift of myself.
Now I would be able to dedicate my whole being to the diffusion
of this great news, of this great liberation, and this would happen
through intelligence, comprehension, harmony and balancing of my
shaken mind. It was not easy to cope with the reactions of my family,
my wife, my friends, my professional environment, the Church and
my friends who were still priests. But I received a lot of help from so
many awakened friends and by the guidance which I received while
attending the mind and body awakening sessions. I look at all my
years of studying as having been spent in a laboratory, a direct
preparation for life which I am presently leading as a Guide in this
magnificent movement, in this “strange” but beautiful “new” religion,
this young atheist religion. I don’t feel that there has been a breaking
off with things of the past, because I am continuing what I had
started as a child: the understanding of the beginning of Man, the
genesis, to be able to walk in the light and build the present, always
to de-mystify and always to decant and cream off the truth from some
2,000 years of crust by deepening my understanding of the numerous
theological, philosophical and religious aspects of the messages given
to Rael by the creators of Humanity, the Elohim, so as to live out the
present and to look forward to a splendid future.
That night I had been shaken by the messages, so much so because
I had felt them for so many years, almost unconsciously. Since then I
have felt the messages in every part of my life, even in the most
hidden corners, in my professional work as an educator, in my family,
social and political life. They have turned all my beliefs upside-down,
but I had been ready for a long time. I had been waiting, and I had
even taught about this prophet of the Elohim. But I could not very
well understand. Then... suddenly, everything became clear: the
messages awakened me, they stared me in the face. All at once I could
understand The Bible, Jesus and Yahweh.
347

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

I was so happy that such an event had happened that I trembled
with joy. It was like an ice-cold shower on a hot, humid, summer’s
day.
I met Rael a few days after the conference for the first time. In one
weekend I had read the two messages twice over. Rael said to me:
‘You have everything within yourself to find the answers to your
problems. Once they will have been solved, you will be 80 per cent
more efficient. Your family problems are crushing you; they are
stopping you and paralyzing you.’ Now I know what he meant. I am
so happy at having chosen the path of awareness and consciousness.
Since then, I have read the messages many times over, and
becoming a Guide was the consecration of my priesthood for which
I had always been searching. I understood that I had not waited in
vain, and that I was continuing the true church, the original church,
since I was going to follow the last of the great prophets of the Age of
Apocalypse, and I was going to work at the diffusion of the messages
of the Elohim, our creators, going to work at this “unity” to which I
had already dedicated my life, since these messages announce the
“religion of the religions”, the religion of the infinite, the religion of
the intelligence of Man and the eternity of matter.
Thus, then, is my end and my beginning. I am happy and I love.
I was relieved of my duties as a specialist on religion. I am teaching
French and mathematics as my main subjects, and religion and moral
behavior as my second subjects. I never speak openly of the messages
in my professional environment, but people can feel them in my
behavior, and I am respected for it. The time is near when my
colleagues will ask me about these messages; I can just feel it; I am
sure of it. Everywhere else I go, I diffuse the messages by my presence
and by my words. I have “apostatized” the Roman Catholic church,
even though I am still convinced that there has been no breaking, but
rather a continuation of the truth. This rejuvenates and gratifies me.
My entire life is dedicated to revealing to all men of good will, this
de-mystified truth, this message of love, fraternity and peace, this
serenity, this unique and revolutionary message for those who seek to
348

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - T HE C ONSECRATION O F M Y P RIESTHOOD

understand it with the eyes of intelligence, which our creators, the
Elohim, have given us, the eyes of wisdom, created and infinite.

To Become Active So As Not To Become Radioactive
MICHEL BELUET – Former National Guide for the USA
Here is my testimony, where I will elaborate the profound and
fundamental reasons which have led me to become a Guide in the
Raelian Movement, after I had given serious consideration to the
implications brought about by my adhesion. The message given to
Claude Vorilhon, Rael, by the Elohim, implies a total reconsideration
at all levels: individual, social, political, scientific, philosophical and
religious. This allows universal involvement in the building of
tomorrow’s society. But how did I come to these conclusions?
Since the age of 12, I have been interested in a wide range of topics,
and I tried to stay on top of whatever was going on, as well as
whatever had happened in the past, when I reached a stage where I
wondered about the evolution of Humanity. And I, like many people,
was questioning everything, while dreaming of a perfect world. What
did I discover, and what were my hopes? Here they are synthesized:
THE ORIGINS OF LIFE
I was not satisfied with the theory of a divine creation, although
there seemed to be one constancy: throughout the world, all religions
and mythologies speak of the creation of Man by one or a number of
Gods who came from Heaven. I then concluded that there had to be
some truth in this first thought, palpable and material, which implied
that Man had come from somewhere other than Earth. The theory of
evolution, which claims that Man is the result of successive mutations
349

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

starting from inorganic matter which resulted in the organic beings
that we are, seemed to have too many faults to be a truly valuable
theory. Moreover, it is presently being seriously questioned by
eminent scientists.
MAN
I had noticed that since the beginning of time, Man lacked
tolerance, love, respect and fraternity, in his relationships with others.
I wished that these shortcomings would be erased in human relations.
SOCIETY
Throughout history, the repeated failures of every type of
government to solve the fundamental problems of Humanity, have
forced me to think of a system which would allow the election of the
best qualified people on Earth, who would be concerned only with
improving our society.
This would imply that they would not be paid by the political,
military or industrial trusts which have permitted a great number of
deadly wars and an everlasting increase in weapons of destruction, in
the name of values such as the mother country, work and family, and
the servitude of Man by Man. I became conscious that Humanity had
reached a crucial epoch, decisive in its evolution, where Man’s future
had become a gamble.
THE RELIGIONS
I felt that there existed, at the base of all the religions, a
fundamental and accessible truth, but also that the primitive and
obscurantist systems had used this truth to enslave men to absolute
restriction. I also felt that this truth, as revealed by the prophets, had
to come from beings who had reached a very high level of wisdom. I
opposed the notion that Man had to be guilty because of his carnal
nature, as I was against everyone who sought to diminish humans
under the pretense that they would be greater after death, in another
350

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - TO B ECOME A CTIVE ...

dimension. I was convinced that Man could reach a superior level of
consciousness while remaining in complete harmony with his human
nature.
SCIENCE
This original curiosity which Man has transformed into a systematic
study of himself and the environment in which he lives, has
permitted Humanity to push back the frontiers of the unexplained. I
knew that the use of science to solve the problems with which our
civilization is confronted is possible, if science is used wisely.
Pollution, overpopulation, hunger, the energy crisis – all these
problems could be solved by science in harmony with Nature, and it
is imperative that this ideal be attained as soon as possible. I was
equally conscious of the temporary aspect of our knowledge and that
every theory is but a tentative interpretation of facts, which
themselves are undeniable.
THE UNKNOWN
I was aware of everything which is unexplained on Earth, and
which led us to believe that extra-terrestrial intelligent beings
intervened in the course of our history. All of this being quite natural
for me, knowing that one day we could explain everything.
I was then conscious of the present state of things, and my hopes
for a better world and an evolution of Humanity towards more
harmony, non-violence and more fraternity, and I could not be
satisfied in any existing organization, whether it be religious, political
or social. I felt powerless and alone. It was then, in 1978, that I
learned of the messages that extra-terrestrials had entrusted to Claude
Vorilhon, in December 1973, which were contained in The Book
Which Tells The Truth and in a second book, written later after the
1975 encounter, The Extra-Terrestrials Took Me To Their Planet. I was
filled with joy in reading these two books, in which were synthesized
all my hopes of attaining this harmony, this peace and this fraternity
351

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

which has always been missing on this Earth. The books also tell of
the means used by our Fathers to overcome the same problems with
which we are faced. But like good fathers, they are leaving us free to
choose, because they consider us as being individuals capable of
choosing.
I decided to become a Guide so as to be able to communicate this
hope to the world, so that Humanity is able to reach the Golden Age
where Man will be able to blossom totally. I did not want to remain
a passive witness to the evolution of humanity towards a possible selfdestruction, but rather an active man, so as to avoid the possibility
that one day we would all become radioactive.

From Marxism to Raelism Adhesion
JEAN-BERNARD NDJOGA-AWIRONDJOGO –
Political Scientist and ex-Marxist
It was not easy, for someone accustomed to reasoning in terms of
evolution, of classes and the struggle between classes, to understand
and accept that something fantastic, marvellous and reassuring exists
behind “tradition”.
But through the messages of the Elohim, all the seeming
absurdities of the biblical writings suddenly became for me, noble,
practical and of infinite importance.
The knowledge that man is not the result of random chance, but
the scientific and wise creation of someone who made him in His
image and in His resemblance! What a sublime truth!
And to think that one day, men of the Earth will be equal to their
creators, the extra-terrestrials!
Now the time announced has arrived.
Rael, the light of the Elohim close to men has started his mission.

352

A DDENDUM - F ROM M ARXISM

TO

R AELISM A DHESION

It now rests with us as Guides, who would help him, to continue
to help him by spreading the messages of our heavenly fathers more
than ever, so that the Earth, in turn, will join the concert of
intergalactic civilizations who exist in the infinity of the universe.

A New Art of Living
MICHEL DEYDIER – Psychologist
There exists in the universe an indefinite number of psychosomatic
emotional entities, or if you prefer, personalities, with their respective
biological, energetic and mental activities. The social relationships of
these entities necessitate a very important adaptation faculty, without
which Man could not form a social group. Man’s mental riches are
conditioned by his aptitude, which allows him at any given time, to
question all which composes his life, and makes him happy or
unhappy.
I have used this same faculty when trying to trace the path which
would lead me to personal consciousness and progress. The
knowledge of Man is a question of versatility. One must slip into the
smallest openings of the conscious, then evolve in the deepest layers
of the subconscious, without destroying their fauna, “the devil take
the frustrations”, but one must nevertheless acknowledge, “I frustrate
you, you frustrate me”. The story never changes, and we are always
the same.
If you wish to climb inside your head, you must first learn to be
scratched as you climb; there are so many things that you will not
want to see. So, face them and start laughing at yourself, seeing how
vain you can be; the more conscious you will become of your
stupidity and your vanity, the greater person you will become, and
you will never hurt again, because you will have assumed yourself
totally, before loving yourself.
353

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

It was in this state of mind that I recognized the finality of the
messages; first, I recognized, then I digested in a long digestive
process, which had its periods of activity, I must confess.
At first it was not a simple coincidence, but a real collision, where
an enormous brain-washing, more or less conscious, was released,
putting back each thing in its place. A psychologist being by
definition a disorganized person on the outside (but fairly well
organized on the inside), I was stunned to see how the information
revealed by the extra-terrestrials not only found its place in my mind,
but also established an incredible synthesis between the elements of
my life. What is even more incredible is the creative changes which I
now use to help my patients.
Actions causing reactions, I was led to verify one by one each of the
principal elements of the messages. Quite honestly, I came to a
number of conclusions; some were absurd, others less so. I refuse to
follow a credo, because the mental operations related to believing
have nothing to do with the operations conducting logical reasoning,
even with subjective verifications.
I do not blindly believe in extra-terrestrials, I truly understand
their role and their presence in a true and reflected manner, in
complete understanding of the decor. Thus supported by these
conclusions, I took a second look at the important points of my
formation. I turned upside down and then side-ways, but to my great
surprise, I did not find much of anything, either on one side or the
other. I was supposed to remedy the sickness of the mind, and I had
just discovered how ridiculous and limited I really was. I have
discovered that psychotherapy rests on a Judeo-Christian base, which
is well disguised. If you look at it from this angle, this thought is not
very reassuring, nor is it very clean. But on the other hand, who has
never been cheated by Society? Be that as it may, one must react to
those usurpations; and so here I am on this slow boat which carries
the truth, beauty, sanity and which builds a liberating progress.
The messages given to Claude Vorilhon by the extra-terrestrials, are
in my own mind, the most intelligent answer which I could ever find
354

C OMMENTARIES & T ESTIMONIALS

OF

R AELIANS - A N EW A RT O F L IVING

on the origins of Humanity, as well as the destiny of our civilization
and enlightenment on the anatomy of a new art of living.
I adhere to this impulse without any hesitation.
I refuse to concentrate my life on an egotistical individual ideology.
A profound instinct has led me to study this report, an old instinct a
little forgotten, which gives a man the strength to rise again. Each
man has it, each one of us can participate in the renovation of the
collective life, at his own level, while using his adaptation faculty and
his instinct for survival.
Here are the two things which make Man the creature which is
more likely to be able to modify his terrestrial and cosmic
environment, and which authorize him to make the ultimate choice
in the great passion-filled moments of history.
Never has Society been so close to its goals, and it’s only natural for
it to be so disturbed.
Past history overflows with events, incontestable proofs of
evolutional values of suffering. The present shows the logical issues of
the great rules of evolution. The future offers a panorama bursting
with possibilities, due to the union of moral values with the capital,
technical and scientific values.
These are the motivations which have led me to understand the
messages given by the extra-terrestrials. I am happy to have had the
opportunity to give my testimony. I give my firm support to the
messages, without any reservations, and my aspirations are in the
image of the steps which brought about the creation of life on our
planet.

355

5
ADDENDUM

Encounter of October 7th, 1976

O

n October 7th 1976, about 50 Raelians were at La Negrerie,
near Roc Plat, in Dordogne in the South West of France for the
first anniversary of the contact of October 7th 1975,
commemorating the time when Rael had been taken to the planet of
the Eternals and had received the message contained in the second
book: The Extra-Terrestrials Took Me To Their Planet. The meeting
was to take place at 3pm. At 2:45pm, everyone had arrived and
gathered around Rael. There was a profound feeling of harmony
among the participants who were all thrilled to spend these few
moments with the last of the great prophets. Suddenly, someone
cried: ‘What is that falling from the sky?’ Great flakes were falling
from the near cloudless sky. They seemed to be made of a cottony
substance, which when touched, melted in a few seconds. Then
someone cried: ‘Look, there is something very shiny in the sky!’ Two
luminous objects, both very bright, were just above us. The fall of the
flakes lasted about ten minutes, then the objects suddenly
disappeared. Roger, a Guide from Toulouse who worked in a research
laboratory, was able to obtain a sample of the cottony flakes, but
upon taking them for analysis, they vaporized.
All the people who were privileged to live this extraordinary
experience had not been disappointed, even if it had meant a long
trip half way across France for some, and for others even further, to
356

E NCOUNTER

OF

O CTOBER 7 TH , 1976

have their cellular plan transmitted by Rael. At the precise moment
and the exact location of where the meeting was going to take place,
the Elohim had offered a sign to those present, which they would
never forget.
For the first time, Rael had not been the only witness to the
Elohim’s activities. There were 50 people with him who can testify to
the phenomenon.
Philippe, the Guide from Belgium, found out later from reading a
book that the same phenomenon had been observed in Brazil,
Belgium and most noticeably in Italy during a football game which
had to be interrupted. There were always the same brilliant vessels
and the cottony flakes.
Rael insists that the gatherings are not aimed at being witnesses to
the sighting of UFOs, but nevertheless, many participants still wish
that the Elohim would again grant them the pleasure of appearing...

The Message of the Elohim, March 14th, 1978
Transmitted telepathically to Rael at Midnight:
‘I, Yahweh, through the words of my messenger, Rael, address to
the people of the Earth the following message:
Beware! It is not impossible that other extra-terrestrial civilizations
will make contact very soon with the people of the Earth. They are
people we have also created scientifically in another part of the
universe, and with whom we maintain presently no direct
communication for reasons that we cannot explain to you now
without creating a serious imbalance. You must simply know that we
are counting on you to reveal to those people their true origin, for
they are your brothers from space and like you are looking for their
creator. Tell them the truth about their creation, by revealing to them
The Book Which Tells the Truth and the message of October 7th of
year 30 of the Age of Apocalypse.’.
357

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

It is important to note that this is the one and only message which
Rael has ever received telepathically in three years. All that men
should know, or nearly all, has been said in the first two messages.

Modification of the New Commandments
The sixth of the new commandments found in the second message is
modified: In order to avoid exaggerated ageing of the Head of the
Raelian Movement, the Guide of Guides will be elected for a seven
year term, by level five guides, who must number at least 12 to vote.
Until there are at least 12 level fives, the levels four and five Guides
will join together in a vote, and there must be a total of 12 people to
decide. If there are not sufficient Guides at these two levels, the level
three Guides will be admitted to vote. The Guide of Guides will be
elected between the levels four and five, and will be eligible for reelection at the end of his mandate of seven years.
This modification also implies a modification of the fourth of the
new commandments also contained in the second message: The
annual donation, which is equal to at least one per cent of net annual
revenue should be made payable to the Raelian Foundation. This will
provide for the needs of the Guide of Guides, and permit him to
devote himself full time to his mission: spreading the messages. This
modification suggested by Rael was accepted by our creators who
understand the need for these changes, so that the Movement may
become more efficient and accelerate the diffusion of the messages.

Message of the Elohim, December 13th, 1997
It is now 24 years ago that, through the mouth of our prophet,
RAEL, our beloved son, we gave to the Men and Women of the Earth
358

A DDENDUM - M ESSAGE

OF THE

E LOHIM , D ECEMBER 13 TH , 1997

our final message. The one which, as predicted, came to destroy the
"Mystery of God".
It has been 24 years during which you Raelians, who have officially
and publicly recognized us as your Creators, have worked so that we
may be welcomed in the requested Embassy. Your devotion and your
efforts have warmed our hearts, and the most devoted among you are
among those who will be rewarded.
In all the religions, there are people who deserve our love, but
Raelians are the ones closest to us. They are our new Chosen People
and will one day have a new Promised Land, because their love is
based on consciousness and understanding, and not on blind faith.
Those who loved us as one or several supernatural gods were
precious to our eyes, and they did not have a choice in prescientific
times; but those who, knowing that we are not supernatural but
created in their image, continue to love us and even to love us much
more, touch us to a greater extent and will be rewarded more, because
they love us with their consciousness and not only with their faith.
And it is consciousness that makes them similar to us.
We asked that an Embassy be built to welcome us near Jerusalem,
and the authorities of the stiff necked people have refused several
times to grant the necessary authorizations and extra-territorial status.
Our preference for Jerusalem is merely sentimental, because for us
Jerusalem is everywhere where human beings love us, respect us and
wish to welcome us with due respect, and the chosen people are those
who, knowing who we are, want to welcome us, meaning the
Raelians. The real Jews on Earth are no longer the people of Israel but
those who recognize us as their creators and wish to see us return.
The link we have with the people of Israel is about to be severed,
and the new Alliance is coming to an end. They have very little time
to understand their mistake before being dispersed once again.
In the meantime, we must from now on ask for the necessary
permission and extra-territorial status from all nations on Earth for
the erection of our Embassy, and the radius of one kilometer can be
composed of water as well as firm land, with the condition that
navigation be prohibited.
359

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

When a country grants this authorization, Israel will have, for the
last time, a short period of reflection to grant this authorization and
will keep the privilege, or the Embassy will be built elsewhere, and
the people of David will lose our protection and will be dispersed.
The country which will build the Embassy on its territory or on a
territory it will give or sell to this effect, with the necessary extraterritorial status, will have a guaranteed and flourishing future, will
benefit from our protection and will become the spiritual and
scientific centre of the whole planet for the millenniums to come.
The hour of our Great Return is near, and we will support and
protect the most devoted ones among you. Your enemies will witness
our might more and more, most especially the usurper from Rome,
his bishops and all those who act in our name without being
appointed.
Year 2000 is nothing for us and nothing for a very large majority
of people who are not Christians, but many false prophets will try to
use this change in the millennium to mislead humans. It was
expected, and it is a selection of the most conscious ones. Follow your
Guide of Guides; he will know how to avoid the dangers of this time
of transition because he is the Way, the Truth, the Life.
Buddhism is more and more successful on Earth, and this is good,
as it is the religion that is closest to the Truth and to the new
scientific-spiritual equilibrium necessary for human beings of the
new age. Buddhism without the mystical load of the past gives
Raelism, and more and more Buddhists will become Raelians.
May your joy in seeing the approach of our Great Return give you
wings to overcome the last obstacles of the journey. We are so close to
this day, that whenever you meditate, you should be able to feel our
presence. And this sensation will illuminate your days and nights and
will make your life wonderful, no matter what obstacles are left to
overcome. The joy of seeing us will be lesser than the pleasure of
having worked for this day to come. The greatest pleasure is in the
accomplishment of your mission, not in its result. In the meantime,
our love and light will guide you, through the words of our Beloved
Prophet, and do not forget that even if we constantly see you, each
360

A DDENDUM - M ESSAGE

OF THE

E LOHIM , D ECEMBER 13 TH , 1997

time he looks at you, we see you even more because he beautifies what
he sees through the Love he has for you.
The more you love him, the more you love us, because he is a part
of us on Earth. If you find it sometimes hard to show us affection, it
is because you do not have the consciousness of seeing our Beloved
Son walking amongst you once again.
You cannot love us and neglect him because, once again, you reach
the Father through the Son, because he is among you, eats when you
eat, sleeps when you sleep, laughs when you laugh and cries when you
cry.
Do not pretend to love us if you do not treat him as the dearest
among us.
His Love for you is so great that he constantly asks us to forgive
things we judge as unforgivable. He is your best advocate in the eyes
of your Creators. And on your planet where Love and Forgiveness are
more and more rare in a society which is becoming more and more
barbaric through a lack of these values, he is your most precious asset.
You lack Love? Look at him; he is alive among you!
May his light guide you to us whether we return or not because in
either case, we await you among our eternals.
Peace and Love to all Humans of goodwill.

The United Nations - Rael, September 2005
THE UN MUST DISAPPEAR TO BE REPLACED
BY A MORE DEMOCRATIC ORGANIZATION
This is what I have been saying for the last 30 years...The UN is not
a democratic organization. It is an elite club run by a few ex-colonial
and modern imperialist superpowers, all of them from white and
western countries.
For the UN to be truly democratic, each nation should be entitled
to a vote proportional to its population, which means that India and
361

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

China, who represent almost 50% of humanity with a joint
population of almost 3 billion, would have a corresponding "voting
power" of 50%. The US on the other hand, with only 300 million
inhabitants, which only represents 5% of the world population,
should have a voting power of only 5%, and the UK, with only 60
million inhabitants representing just 1% of the world population,
should have a voting power of only 1%. But instead, the UN is ruled
by a small group of rich western nations who represent less than 10%
of humanity, especially those in the so called "security council"...
If Bush, Blair and other leaders of imperialist, ex-colonial countries
really want what they claim they want: to promote democracy, then
they must accept a truly democratic UN.
But the truth is that they don't really want it; what they really want
is to continue ruling the world, both economically and spiritually. As
my setting up of the ICACCI (International Committee Against
Christian Calendar Imperialism - www.icacci.org ) pointed out, why
is the UN, which is supposed to represent the whole of humanity,
using the Christian calendar for all its official documents when only
25% of humanity is Christian? Why should Muslims, Sikhs, Jews,
Buddhists and Shintoists, etc. who each have their own calendar, be
forced to sign UN papers using the Christian calendar?
The UN could adopt a neutral calendar, using as year zero the year
of its own inception or the year Hiroshima was bombed, as a symbol
of peace. But instead, it still uses the Christian calendar which forces
non-Christian countries, who happen to be the majority, to recognize
Jesus’ supposed birth date when signing documents – without any
sensitivity to the feelings of those whose forefathers were massacred,
bonded into slavery or rampaged by crusades in the name of
Christianity.
The UN has only two choices: completely change and become a
truly democratic, non-religious organization or be destroyed and
replaced by a truly neutral and democratic organization. Maybe the
latter is the best solution, as it is always very difficult to change
existing things. Maybe the new world body which would replace the
UN will cost much less and be much more democratic: “made by the
362

A DDENDUM - T HE U NITED N ATIONS , R AEL - S EPTEMBER 2005

people for the people”. It could even be a virtual internet-based world
government, where the people can express their choices directly
online. This on-line democracy would have the added advantage of
dispensing with the most dangerous, least trustworthy and expensive
people on Earth: politicians. My proposition of a web government
(www.upworldgov.org) could be the right solution to replace the
obsolete UN.

363

AUTHOR’S POSTSCRIPT

Some thirty years have passed since I wrote the three books that now
make up this new compendium edition re-entitled Intelligent Design
- Message from the Designers. I will discuss the reasons behind this new
title further on, but in the meantime, it is important to reflect that a
great deal has happened over the past thirty years. Our world has
continued to change very rapidly during that period, always in the
direction of the revealed information I was first given in the early to
mid 1970s. That is why the books are reproduced unchanged here to
demonstrate that the extraordinary truths first revealed three decades
ago are being gradually and successively proven by new scientific
discoveries and developments.
I originally published the first part of this book as The Book Which
Tells the Truth in the French language in early 1974. After a sudden,
unexpected and unforgettable space journey in October 1975, I
followed the first book with Extra-Terrestrials Took Me to Their Planet
in 1976. In 1979, I wrote and published Let's Welcome the Extraterrestrials, making known for the first time information which I had
earlier been asked by the Elohim to withhold for three years. I have
written four other books, one entitled Geniocracy (1978), which
describes an advanced form of democracy advocated by the Elohim,
Sensual Meditation (1980), a teaching book of vital meditative
practices designed by the Elohim to awaken our senses fully and help
us achieve true inner harmony, Yes to Human Cloning (2000), which
outlines the scientific advances soon to be part of our lives in the areas
of cloning and nanotechnology, and The Maitreya, an anthology
selected by leading Raelians of my more recent contemporary lectures
and talks.
These books have now been translated into nearly thirty languages
by volunteer Raelian supporters. In all, more than two million copies
364

AUTHOR ’ S P OSTSCRIPT

of my books have been sold worldwide. The vast majority have been
printed, published and distributed under the control of various
national branches of the International Raelian Movement (IRM).
In the thirty-two years of its existence, the IRM has grown steadily.
Currently, the organization has a total of more than 65,000 members
worldwide, and national branches are now established in nearly 90
countries, including all the world's major nations. At present, the
Movement is strongest in France, Canada, Japan, South Korea and
Africa. It is also expanding strongly in the United States, Australia,
Britain, South East Asia, Latin America, and most of the other
countries of Europe. More recently, new national branches have been
founded in Bulgaria, Mongolia and Lithuania.
At regular seminars held on every continent of the world, the
teachings of the Elohim as outlined in these books have been passed
on to many thousands of people of all ages by myself and senior
members of the IRM. In all, there are now over 200 Guides, or
Raelian priests, worldwide. The Movement has two main
publications in which I and other leading Raelians write of current
developments: Apocalypse, an international glossy magazine which is
published twice a year, and Contact, a weekly e-newsletter that is
distributed online at raelianews.org. These publications help to
further disseminate the philosophies and insights of the Elohim.
The birth of Dolly the sheep was a landmark event in human
scientific history, and it then became clear that very soon the cloning
of human beings would become fairly commonplace. Just as on the
Elohim's planet, cloning on Earth will become a means for human
beings to achieve eternal life.
After Dolly the sheep was cloned in 1997, I initiated a project
called Clonaid to bring attention to the issue of human cloning. Soon
after, Dr. Brigitte Boisselier, a brilliant scientist and Raelian Bishop,
took over the project and created a company. I withdrew myself
completely from any and all involvement, since my initial purpose
was simply to promote the concept of human cloning, so the IRM
has no direct connection to Clonaid whatsoever. I will, of course,
continue to philosophically support Dr. Boisselier and her company
365

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

in continuing their work, and I was especially pleased when she
dramatically announced in December 2002 the front page global
headline news that was perhaps the biggest breakthrough of the entire
32-year mission to date: Clonaid had successfully assisted the birth of
the world's first cloned human baby, a little girl nick-named “Eve”.
Although up to the time of writing, legal complexities have delayed
publication of the scientific proof of this successful human cloning,
there was no doubt that the name of the Raelian Movement and what
it stood for had become common knowledge everywhere around the
planet.
The next step required will be to make possible the transfer of
mental information, memory and personality from an aging
individual into a new, physically young adult clone. This transfer of
memory directly into a young adult means that effectively the same
individual can live indefinitely. Human laws will have to be adapted
to our changing culture and increasing technological advances. These
are still early days for all such issues, but new laws will have to be
passed to define criteria setting out who will be allowed to benefit
from these technologies. Here, as on the Elohim's planet, the number
of clones may need to be limited to one per individual, and then only
after death.
This year, another breakthrough of perhaps similar magnitude
occurred, as is mentioned briefly in the Foreword to this book, when
a peer-reviewed article appeared in a Washington scientific journal
effectively announcing the academic acceptance of a new theory of
Intelligent Design. This publication marked the first formal high-level
academic challenge to Darwin's outdated and unproven evolutionary
theory. As a result, over the past year or so, Intelligent Design, or ID,
has attracted growing attention and inspired much debate in
academic circles and beyond in America, Europe and worldwide. In
particular, as I write these words, a raging debate is underway in the
United States about the introduction of the Intelligent Design theory
into schools as an alternative to Darwin's Theory of Evolution.
Opponents of this see the move as an attempt to reintroduce
“God” officially into the nation's schools despite the Supreme
366

AUTHOR ’ S P OSTSCRIPT

Court's refusal to allow this almost 50 years ago on the grounds that
the clear separation of church and state is written in the Constitution.
Indeed it is very evident at present that American religious
conservatives are definitely using this camouflage to infiltrate their
dogmatic religious views back into America's schools.
But our very original and unique Raelian explanation of the origin
of life on Earth effectively offers a third option, and one which
cannot be denied by the Supreme Court, as it doesn't promote
religion in schools! It can best be described as atheist Intelligent
Design, which is the scientific creation of life on Earth performed by
an advanced human civilization from another planet. This brings into
being a completely new rational theory explaining our origins which
is actually reproducible in a laboratory, as evidenced by the recent
announcement by scientific researcher Craig Venter, that he has
started the process of creating the first totally synthetic unicellular
organism. The essential prerequisite for something to be scientific is
that it can be reproducible in a laboratory. Evolution has never been
reproduced in any laboratory; that's why it's called a "theory", and
the same goes, of course, for the theory of “God”. This third way,
atheist Intelligent Design, is the only one which can be reproduced in
a laboratory right now and is actually about to happen.
The idea that there are billions of planets similar to Earth in the
universe is also accepted by most scientists, as is the fact that our
planet is not necessarily the most advanced in the universe. So, having
a much more advanced human civilization coming to Earth a long
time ago to create life in a kind of panspermia is the most rational
explanation of our origins. At the very least, it is worth being taught
in schools as an alternative to the theory of Evolution, and no school
can deny access to an atheist Intelligent Design theory on the
grounds of church and state separation. Even believers in “God”
would stand to gain by using our explanation as a "Trojan horse" to
enter the school system as an alternative to the monolithic, dogmatic
and intolerant Darwinist theory of evolution.
Having said that, it is important to also say that preparations to
build the embassy requested by the Elohim are also progressing well.
367

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The embassy and residence need to be protected by extra-territorial
rights like any normal international diplomatic mission, and in
accordance with the Elohim's precise instructions, Raelian architects
have already completed commissioned drawings for the complex of
buildings where the most dramatic and extraordinary meeting of
world government leaders in history will take place. Not long after we
built a small scale model of the embassy based on these drawings, a
crop circle appeared in England which bore an astonishing
resemblance to it.
I have to say that finance is not the chief obstacle to the completion
of this project. The political and diplomatic problems are a thornier
issue, and patience and perseverance will be required to overcome
them. In this regard, the International Raelian Movement has several
times since 1991 made presentations to the Israeli Government and
to the Chief Rabbi in Jerusalem, requesting that the necessary extraterritoriality be granted so that the embassy may be built close to
Jerusalem where the Elohim created the first human beings. The first
temple of the Jewish religion was in fact a previous embassy around
which the ancient city was built. The Elohim are now waiting for the
State of Israel to grant such extra-territorial status for the new
embassy - the third temple - but so far there has been no positive
response to the seven requests that have been made.
The first approach was made on November 8th, 1991 on the
Jewish New Year, and another official request was made to Israel's
Chief Rabbi some months later. The request was acknowledged, and
a study of the application began. In the summer of 1993, an Israeli
government commission concluded that the Raelian Movement was
peaceful in intent and was of no threat to Israel's security. In their
report, two rabbis are believed to have concluded that it would be
"better not to do anything against Rael in case he really is the awaited
Messiah". In November 1993, a further direct request was made to
Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, when he was in Canada
attending the Montreal Jewish Convention. After a month, Mr.
Rabin replied through one of his office representatives that he could
not comply. If Israel ultimately declines to allow a grant of extra368

AUTHOR ’ S P OSTSCRIPT

territoriality, as already indicated, we will most likely establish the
embassy on Palestinian or Egyptian territory or in another
neighboring state. In fact, the lower slopes of Mount Sinai would
make an excellent alternative choice since that is where Yahweh, the
leader of the Elohim, first appeared to Moses. Nevertheless, the
Elohim would prefer to give Israel the opportunity to agree to this
request since that is the true purpose of the State of Israel. Since the
message of the Elohim, on December 13th, 1997, we have started
negotiations with other countries, and once we have “the go ahead”,
a final “last chance” request will be made to Israel.
Already, in 1990, as a sign of their special feelings towards the
people of Israel, the Elohim agreed to my suggestion to modify their
original Symbol of Infinity when used by Raelian Movement
branches in the West. The central swastika, which means “well-being”
in Sanskrit and also represents infinity in time, was replaced with a
galaxy-shaped swirl. This change was made in an effort to help the
negotiations for building the embassy of the Elohim in Israel and also
out of respect for the sensitivities of the victims who suffered and died
under the Nazi swastika during the Second World War. In Asia,
where the swastika can be found in most Buddhist temples and where
it represents infinity in time, the original symbol is not a problem.
This modification of the IRM symbol for the West was, of course,
gladly made, and when looking back now and surveying our progress
since 1973, I can see that everything is going according to plan.
The International Raelian Movement will one day achieve all the
goals set by the Elohim - with or without my participation. I know
that it has become self-sustaining and could now function perfectly
well without me. Much still remains to be done, and even when at
last the great day dawns and the Elohim land openly and officially
before the eyes of world government leaders and an international
array of television cameras and media representatives, some skeptics,
I expect, will still continue to doubt whether these highly advanced
human beings could truly have created all life artificially on our
planet. The leading members of the IRM and myself are aware that
this might be so. But this does not daunt us - quite the reverse.
369

I NTELLIGENT D ESIGN : M ESSAGE F ROM T HE D ESIGNERS

The Elohim themselves will definitely land here in the not too
distant future, around the time of what some call “the singularity”when everything will be understood thanks to science. It will be no
later than thirty years from now and may be much sooner if the
truths I have described in this book spread more rapidly around the
world.
The Elohim will bring with them all the great prophets of the past,
including Moses, Elijah, Buddha, Jesus Christ, and Mohammed.
This long-awaited event will be the most wonderful day in the history
of humanity. I hope you will be present when they land at their
embassy, and I hope that you are able to share the joy of knowing that
you played a part in this wonderful adventure. The area where the
embassy is to be built will become the spiritual center of the world for
millennia to come. People from all nations will come in pilgrimage to
this “holy” place. A replica of the embassy will be built near the real
one and opened to the public so that they can see what it is like
inside.
But will the Raelian Movement's mission end with the coming of
our creators? Not at all! On the contrary, it will be the real beginning
of our mission. With the disappearance of all primitive religions, the
vacuum will have to be filled with a new spirituality - one that is in
tune with the technological revolution still to come.
We are now today's human beings using tomorrow's technology,
with yesterday's religions and yesterday's thinking. Thanks to the
Elohim, we will be able to reach new spiritual levels by embracing
their own religion - an atheist one - that of infinity as represented by
their symbol. The Guides of the Raelian Movement will become the
priests of this new religion, allowing human beings to feel in
harmony with the infinitely small and the infinitely large, allowing
them to realize that we are stardust and energies forever.
Laboratories and universities will be built close to the embassy and
there, under the guidance of the Elohim, our own scientists will be
able to improve their knowledge. In this way, we will gradually
approach the Elohim's scientific level. This will enable us to venture
out to other planets to create life ourselves, and we will become in our
370

AUTHOR ’ S P OSTSCRIPT

own turn "Elohim" for those we create. On our own planet, Brigitte
Boisselier and other scientists of realistic vision have already started
out along the path of becoming “intelligent designers” who, as they
work for the future, will be fully aware of the true nature of our past
and our origins. Through us and through them, spirituality and
science will walk peacefully together hand in hand, free at last from
the medieval fears that have haunted our past. This will enable us to
become “gods” ourselves, as was written long ago in the ancient
scriptures - but perhaps rather more accurately or amusingly “atheist
gods”.
However, let's not forget that our greatest task is to build the
embassy for the Elohim so that at long last they can come here and
land officially and openly among us! And they will bring to our very
troubled yet potentially very beautiful world their profound teachings
of love as well as science.
Rael
Quebec, Canada
Autumn 2005
This is what I heard:

At one time the Buddha was in the Amra Gardens in the city of Vaishali, accompanied by a multitude of leading monks numbering eight thousand. There were also thirty-two thousand bodhisattvas, all known to the assembly, persons who had carried out all the basic practices of great wisdom. Sustained by the might and supernatural powers of the Buddhas, they accepted and upheld the correct Law in order to guard the citadel of the Dharma. They knew how to roar the lion's roar, and their fame resounded in the ten directions. Without waiting to be asked, they befriended others and brought them comfort. They ensured the continuance and prosperity of the Three Treasures, making certain that these never expired. They conquered and subdued the ill will of the devils and curbed the non-Buddhist doctrines.

All were spotless and pure, having long ago rid themselves of snares and obstructions; their minds constantly resided in a state of unhindered emancipation. Their mindfulness, meditation, retention of the teachings, and eloquence never faltered, and of almsgiving, keeping of the precepts, forbearance, assiduousness, meditation, wisdom, and the power to employ expedient means, there was not one they were deficient in.

They had learned to accept the fact that there is nothing to be grasped at, no view of phenomena to be entertained. They knew how to respond compliantly to others and to turn the unregressing wheel of the Law. Expert in comprehending the characteristics of phenomena, able to understand the capacities of living beings, they towered over the others of the great assembly and had learned to be fearful of nothing.

With their merits and wisdom they disciplined their minds; they adorned their bodies with auspicious signs, ranking foremost in aspect and form, but rejected all worldly embellishments. In fame and renown they soared higher than Mount Sumeru; their profound faith was diamondlike in its firmness. The jewels of their Dharma shone everywhere, raining down sweet dew, and among the assembly the sound of their words was the most subtle and wonderful of all.

They had plumbed the depths of dependent origination and cut off all erroneous views, no longer entertaining the concepts either of being or nonbeing. In expounding the Law they were fearless as roaring lions, and their disquisitions on it rolled forth like thunder. There was no measuring them, for they had passed beyond measure. In seeking out the jewels of the Dharma, they were like practiced pilots at sea. They had mastered all the profound and subtle meanings of the doctrines and were expert in perceiving the past and future existences of living beings and the workings of their minds.

They came close to equaling the freely exercised wisdom of the Buddha, the unparalleled one, his ten powers, his fearlessness, and his eighteen unshared properties. Though they had firmly closed the gate to all manner of evil existences, yet they allowed themselves to be born in the five lower realms, manifesting themselves there so that they might act as great physician kings, adroitly healing the ills of others, doling out whatever medicine suited the ailment, and insuring that the patient took it as prescribed.

Countless benefits-all these they had acquired; countless Buddha lands- all these they had made marvelously pure. No one saw or listened to them without profiting thereby, and no action of theirs was ever performed in vain. Such was the manner in which all merits adhered to them.

The names of the bodhisattvas were Bodhisattva Viewing Equality, Bodhisattva Viewing Inequality, Bodhisattva Viewing Equality and Inequality, Bodhisattva Meditation Freedom King, Bodhisattva Dharma Freedom King, Bodhisattva Dharma Forms, Bodhisattva Shining Forms, Bodhisattva Shining Adornment, Bodhisattva Great Adornment, Bodhisattva Jeweled Accumulation, Bodhisattva Accumulation of Eloquence, Bodhisattva Jeweled Hand, Bodhisattva Jeweled Seal Hand, Bodhisattva Constantly Raised Hand, Bodhisattva Constantly Extended Hand, Bodhisattva Constantly Commiserating, Bodhisattva Joyful Capacity, Bodhisattva Joyful King, Bodhisattva Eloquent Sound, Bodhisattva Storehouse of Emptiness, Bodhisattva Holder of the Jeweled Torch, Bodhisattva Jeweled Valor, Bodhisattva Jeweled View, Bodhisattva of Indra's Net, Bodhisattva Bright Net, Bodhisattva Unconditioned View, Bodhisattva Wisdom Accumulation, Bodhisattva Jeweled Supremacy, Bodhisattva Heavenly King, Bodhisattva Devil Defeating, Bodhisattva Lightning Virtue, Bodhisattva Freedom King, Bodhisattva Merit Forms and Adornments, Bodhisattva Lion's Roar, Bodhisattva Thunder Sound, Bodhisattva Mountain Form Smiting Sound, Bodhisattva Rutting Elephant, Bodhisattva White Rutting Elephant, Bodhisattva Constant Exertion, Bodhisattva Never Resting, Bodhisattva Wonderful Birth, Bodhisattva Flower Adornment, Bodhisattva Perceiver of the World's Sounds, Bodhisattva Gainer of Great Authority, Bodhisattva of Brahma's Net, Bodhisattva Jeweled Staff, Bodhisattva Unsurpassed, Bodhisattva Adorned Land, Bodhisattva Golden Locks, Bodhisattva Gemmed Locks, Bodhisattva Maitreya, and Bodhisattva Dharma Prince Manjushri. There were thirty-two thousand bodhisattvas such as these

There were also ten thousand Brahma kings, Shikhin and others, who had come from the other four continent worlds to visit the place where the Buddha was and listen to the Dharma. There were also twelve thousand Indras who had come from the other four continent worlds to take a seat in the gathering. In addition, there were other heavenly beings of great authority and power, as well as dragons, spirits, yakshas, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kimnaras, mahoragas, and others, all come to take a seat in the assembly. Also arrived to take seats in the assembly were the various monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.

At that time the Buddha, reverently surrounded by this multitude of countless hundreds and thousands of beings, expounded the Law for them. He was like Mount Sumeru, king of mountains, rising up out of the great sea. Resting at ease in his lion's seat clustered with jewels, he shed his radiance over all the great throng gathered there.

At that time a man named Jeweled Accumulation, son of a wealthy man of the city of Vaishali, along with five hundred other sons of wealthy men, had come to the place where the Buddha was, all of them bearing parasols adorned with the seven treasures. Bowing their heads in obeisance before the feet of the Buddha, they joined in offering their parasols as alms to the Buddha.

The Buddha with his supernatural powers then caused all the jeweled parasols to come together and form one single parasol that spread over the entire thousand-millionfold world. All the vast features of that world were visible there in its midst. All the Mount Sumerus of the thousand-millionfold world, Snow Mountains, Muchilinda Mountains, Mahamuchilinda Mountains, Fragrant Mountains, Jeweled Mountains, Gold Mountains, Black Mountains, Iron Encircling Mountains, Great Iron Encircling Mountains, the huge seas, the rivers and watercourses, brooks and streams, fountains and springs, as well as the suns, moons, stars, constellations, heavenly palaces, dragon palaces, and the palaces of the venerable spirits-all these were to be seen within the jeweled parasol. And the Buddhas of the ten directions, the Buddhas as they preached the Law-these too were visible within the jeweled parasol.

At that time all the members of the great assembly, witnessing this manifestation of the Buddha's supernatural powers, sighed in admiration at what they had never seen before. Pressing their palms together, they made obeisance to the Buddha, gazing up in reverence at the face of the Honored One and never taking their eyes from it.

Then the rich man's son, Jeweled Accumulation, in the presence of the Buddha recited these verses of praise:

Eyes pure and broad like the blue lotus;
mind pure, steeped in meditations;
for pure deeds long accumulated, boundless in fame,
your quietude guides the assembly-thus we bow our heads.

We have seen the great sage work miraculous transformations,
showing us all the countless lands in ten directions,
the Buddhas expounding the Law therein-
every one of these we have seen and heard.

The Dharma King's Dharma powers surpass all other beings,
constantly he bestows Dharma riches on them all.
Skillfully he distinguishes the characteristics of phenomena,
never faltering in his grasp of the one great Truth.

You have learned to treat all phenomena with freedom,
so we bow our heads to this Dharma King.
You define things as neither existing nor not existing;
causes and conditions bring about their birth.

No "I," no doer, no recipient,
yet good and bad karma never cease to function.
Beneath the Buddha tree, you used your might to overpower the devil;
gaining the sweet dew of nirvana, you won your way to enlightenment.

Already free of thought, perception, and volition,
you refuted all the non-Buddhist doctrines.
Three times you turned the wheel of the Law in the thousand-millionfold world,
the wheel that from the first has always been pure.

Heavenly and human beings gained the way-this was proof of it;
the Three Treasures thereupon appeared in the world.
This wonderful Law brought rescue to the many beings;
embracing it, they never regress but dwell in constant quietude.

Great physician king, healer of old age, sickness and death,
we pay homage to the boundless virtue of your Dharma sea;
unmoved by acclamation or abuse, like Mount Sumeru,
you pity in equal measure the good and the not good.

In mind and action impartial, like the empty sky-
who can hark to this jewel of humankind, not give respectful assent?
Now we offer these little parasols to the World-Honored One,
and in them is revealed to us the three thousand worlds.

Palaces where gods, dragons, and spirits reside,
kimnaras, yakshas, and all those other beings,
everything that exists in the world we see-
the ten-powered one in pity manifests these transformations.

The assembly, seeing this rare sight, all praise the Buddha;
now we bow our heads to the venerable one of the threefold world.
Great sage, Dharma King, refuge of the multitude-
viewing the Buddha with purified mind, none who do not rejoice!

Each sees the World-Honored One standing right before him-
such are the Buddha's transcendental powers, his unshared properties.
The Buddha preaches the Law with a single voice,
but each living being understands it according to his kind.

All believe the World-Honored One speaks the same words to all-
such are his transcendental powers, his unshared properties.
The Buddha preaches the Law with a single voice,
but each living being understands it in his own way.

All undertake the Buddha's practices and gain profit thereby-
such are his transcendental powers, his unshared properties.
The Buddha preaches the Law with a single voice,
but to some it brings fear, to others delight and joy

Some are moved to leave the world, some are freed of doubt-
such are his transcendental powers, his unshared properties.
Before the great diligence of the ten-powered one we bow our heads;
we bow our heads to the fearlessness he has attained.

We bow heads before the one who dwells in unshared properties,
bow heads before the great leader of all beings.
You can cut the thongs that bind the multitude-we bow heads to that;
you crossed to the other shore-we bow heads to that.

We bow heads to one who can save all those in this world,
bow heads to one who long ago left the path of birth and death.
You know the marks of all beings in their comings and goings,
you have gained apt liberation from all phenomena.

Free of worldly attachments, like the lotus blossom,
constantly you move within the realm of emptiness and quiet;
you have mastered the marks of all phenomena, no blocks or hindrances;
like the sky, you lean on nothing-we bow our heads!
When the rich man's son, Jeweled Accumulation, had finished reciting these verses, he addressed the Buddha, saying, "World-Honored One, these five hundred sons of rich men have all set their minds on anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. They wish to hear how one can purify the Buddha lands.1 We beg the World-Honored One to explain the practices carried out by bodhisattvas in purifying the lands."

1 To "purify the Buddha lands" here means to work diligently to lead the beings of various realms or Buddha lands to enlightenment, which is one of the chief aims of the bodhisattva's activities.

The Buddha said, "Excellent, Jeweled Accumulation! For the sake of the bodhisattvas you do right to ask the Thus Come One about the practices for purifying the lands. Listen well, listen well, and mull it over in your thoughts! I will now explain to you."

Jeweled Accumulation and the other five hundred sons of rich men then made ready to listen to the teachings addressed to them.

The Buddha said, "Jeweled Accumulation, the various kinds of living beings are in themselves the Buddha lands of the bodhisattvas. Why so? Because it is by converting various beings to the teachings that the bodhisattvas acquire their Buddha lands. It is by persuading various beings and overcoming their objections that the bodhisattvas acquire their Buddha lands. It is by inducing the various living beings to enter into the Buddha wisdom in such-and-such a land that they acquire their Buddha lands. It is by inducing the various living beings to develop the capacity for bodhisattva practices in such-and-such a land that they acquire their Buddha lands.

"Why is this? Because the bodhisattva's acquisition of a pure land is wholly due to his having brought benefit to living beings. Suppose a man proposes to build a mansion on a plot of open land. He may do so as he wishes without hindrance. But if he tries to build it in the empty air, he will never be successful. It is the same with the bodhisattvas. It is because they wish to help others to achieve success that they take their vow to acquire Buddha lands. Their vow to acquire Buddha lands in not founded on emptiness.

"Jeweled Accumulation, you should understand that an upright mind is the pure land of the bodhisattva.2 When the bodhisattva attains Buddhahood, then beings who are free of flattery will be born in his country.

2 The term chih-hsin, "upright mind,"may also be translated "straightforward mind" or "direct mind. "In the paragraphs that follow, the term "pure land" is being used to mean a state of mind or course of action that allows a bodhisattva to create a Buddha land that is pure in nature by leading others to enlightenment. The quality or action in the bodhisattva produces a similar state in the beings who are born in his land; for example, because he himself is honest and upright in mind, they are free from flattery or deviousness.

"A deeply searching mind is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who are endowed with blessings will be born in his country.

"A mind that aspires to bodhi or enlightenment is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings dedicated to the Great Vehicle will be born in his country

"Almsgiving is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who are capable of casting away everything will be born in his country.

"Keeping of the precepts is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who fulfill their vow to carry out the ten good actions will be born in his country.

"Forbearance. is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who are adorned with the thirty-two features will be born in his country.

"Assiduousness is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who strive diligently to acquire all manner of blessings will be born in his country

"Meditation is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who can regulate their minds and keep them from disorder will be born in his country.

"Wisdom is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who are correct and certain in understanding will be born in his country.

"A mind devoted to the four immeasurable qualities is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings perfect in the exercise of pity, compassion, joy, and indifference will be born in his country.

"The four methods of winning people are the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who are regulated by the emancipations will be born in his country.

"Expedient means are the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings who can employ all manner of expedient means with complete freedom will be born in his country.

"The thirty-seven elements of the Way are the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings will be born in his country who are proficient in the four states of mindfulness, the four types of correct effort, the four bases of supernatural power, the five roots of goodness, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eightfold holy path.

"A mind intent on transferring merit to others is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, he will acquire a country endowed with all manner of blessings.

"Teaching others to avoid the eight difficulties is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, his country will be free of the three evils and the eight difficulties.

"Observing the precepts himself but not taxing others with their shortcomings is the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, no one in his country will be called a violater of prohibitions.

"The ten good actions are the pure land of the bodhisattva. When he attains Buddhahood, beings will be born in his country who suffer no untimely death, possess great wealth, are pure in action, sincere and truthful in word, ever mild in speech, never alienated from kin or associates, skillful in solving disputes, invariably speaking profitable words, never envious, never irate, and correct in understanding.3

3 Each of the ten merits listed here results from the observance of one of the ten good actions.

"Therefore, Jeweled Accumulation, because the bodhisattva has an upright mind, he is impelled to action. Because he is impelled to action, he gains a deeply searching mind. Because he has a deeply searching mind, his will is well controlled. Because his will is well controlled, he acts in accord with the teachings. Because he acts in accord with the teachings, he can transfer merit to others. Because he transfers merit to others, he knows how to employ expedient means. Because he knows how to employ expedient means, he can lead others to enlightenment. Because he leads others to enlightenment, his Buddha land is pure. Because his Buddha land is pure, his preaching of the Law is pure. Because his preaching of the Law is pure, his wisdom is pure. Because his wisdom is pure, his mind is pure. And because his mind is pure, all the blessings he enjoys will be pure.

"Therefore, Jeweled Accumulation, if the bodhisattva wishes to acquire a pure land, he must purify his mind. When the mind is pure, the Buddha land will be pure."

At that time Shariputra, moved by the Buddha's supernatural powers, thought to himself: "If the mind of the bodhisattva is pure, then his Buddha land will be pure. Now when our World-Honored One first determined to become a bodhisattva, surely his intentions were pure. Why then is this Buddha land so filled with impurities?" 4

4 Shariputra, one of the Buddha's ten major disciples, customarily appears in the Vimalakirti Sutra~us an expresser of doubts or expounder of erroneous views associated with Hinayana teachings. But as indicated here, the Buddha at times deliberately implants such doubts in Shariputra's mind as a means of furthering the exposition of the doctrine.

The Buddha, knowing his thoughts, said to him, "What do you think? Are the sun and moon impure? Is that why the blind man fails to see them?"

Shariputra replied, "No, World-Honored One. That is the fault of the blind man. The sun and moon are not to blame." "Shariputra, it is the failings of living beings that prevent them from seeing the marvelous purity of the land of the Buddha, the Thus Come One. The Thus Come One is not to blame. Shariputra, this land of mine is pure, but you fail to see it."

At that time one of the Brahma kings with his conchshaped tuft of hair said to Shariputra, "You must not think that this Buddha land is impure. Why do I say this? Because to my eyes, Shakyamuni's Buddha land is as pure and spotless as the palace of the heavenly being Great Freedom."

Shariputra said, "When I look at this land, I see it full of knolls and hollows, thorny underbrush, sand and gravel, dirt, rocks, many mountains, filth and defilement."

The Brahma king said, "It is just that your mind has highs and lows and does not rest on Buddha wisdom. Therefore you see this land as impure. Shariputra, the bodhisattva treats all things and beings, each one of them, with perfect equality. His deeply searching mind is pure, and because it rests on Buddha wisdom, it can see the purity of this Buddha land."

The Buddha then pressed his toe against the earth, and immediately the thousand-millionfold world was adorned with hundreds and thousands of rare jewels, till it resembled Jeweled Adornment Buddha's Jeweled Adornment Land of Immeasurible Blessings. All the members of the great assembly sighed in wonder at what they had never seen before, and all saw that hey themselves were seated on jeweled lotuses. 5

5 That is, they perceived that they themselves were possessed of the Buddha nature.

The Buddha said to Shariputra, "Now do you see the marwelous purity of this Buddha land?"

Shariputra replied, "Indeed I do, World-Honored One. Somehing I have never seen before, and never even heard of-now all he marvelous purity of the Buddha land is visible before me!"

The Buddha said to Shariputra, "My Buddha land has always been pure like this. But because I wish to save those persons who are lowly and inferior, I make it seem an impure land full of defilements, that is all. It is like the case of heavenly beings. All ate their food from the same precious vessel, but the food looks different for each one, depending upon the merits and virtues hat each possesses. It is the same in this case, Shariputra. If a person's mind is pure, then he will see the wonderful blessings that adorn this land."

When the Buddha in this way revealed the marvelous purity of the land, the five hundred sons of rich men who accompanied Jeweled Accumulation all were able to grasp the truth of birthlessness, and eighty-four thousand persons all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. The Buddha then released the supernatural power that he had exercised with his toe and the world returned to its former appearance.

Thirty-two thousand heavenly and human beings who wished to pursue the path of the voice-hearer, understanding that all things are impermanent in nature, cast off the dust, removed themselves from defilement, and attained the pure Dharma eye; and eight thousand monks, ceasing to accept the phenomenal world, put an end to all outflows and gained emancipation of mind.

Chapter 2
EXPEDIENT MEANS
At that time in the great city of Vaishali there was a rich man named Vimalakirti. Already in the past he had offered alms to immeasurable numbers of Buddhas, had deeply planted the roots of goodness, and had grasped the truth of birthlessness. Unhindered in his eloquence, able to disport himself with transcendental powers, he commanded full retention of the teachings and had attained the state of fearlessness. He had overcome the torments and ill will of the devil and entered deeply into the doctrine of the Law, proficient in the paramita of wisdom and a master in the employing of expedient means. He had successfully fulfilled his great vow and could clearly discern how the minds of others were tending. Moreover, he could distinguish whether their capacities were keen or obtuse. His mind was cleansed and purified through long practice of the Buddha Way, firm in its grasp of the Great Vehicle, and all his actions were well thought out and planned. He maintained the dignity and authority of a Buddha, and his mind was vast as the sea. All the Buddhas sighed with admiration, and he commanded the respect of the disciplies, of Indra, Brahma, and the Four Heavenly Kings.

Desiring to save others, he employed the excellent expedient of residing in Vaishali. His immeasurable riches he used to relieve the poor, his faultless observation of the precepts served as a reproach to those who would violate prohibitions. Through his restraint and forbearance he warned others against rage and anger, and his great assiduousness discouraged all thought of sloth and indolence. Concentrating his single mind in quiet meditation, he suppressed disordered thoughts; through firm and unwavering wisdom he overcame all that was not wise. l

1 This paragraph describes Vimalakirti's practice of the six paramitas, for which see glossary.

Though dressed in the white robes of a layman, he observed all the rules of pure conduct laid down for monks, and though he lived at home, he felt no attachment to the threefold world. One could see he had a wife and children, yet he was at all times chaste in action; obviously he had kin and household attendants, yet he always delighted in withdrawing from them. Although he wore jewels and finery, his real adornment was the auspicious marks; although he ate and drank like others, what he truly savored was the joy of meditation.

If he visited the gambling parlors, it was solely to bring enlightenment to those there; if he listened to the doctrines of other religions, he did not allow them to impinge on the true faith. Though well versed in secular writings, his constant delight was in the Buddhist Law. Respected by everyone, he was looked on as foremost among those deserving of alms; embracing and upholding the correct Dharma, he gave guidance to old and young. In a spirit of trust and harmony he conducted all kinds of business enterprises, but though he reaped worldly profits, he took no delight in these.

He frequented the busy crossroads in order to bring benefit to others, entered the government offices and courts of law so as to aid and rescue all those he could. He visited the places of debate in order to guide others to the Great Vehicle, visited the schools and study halls to further the instruction of the pupils. He entered houses of ill fame to teach the folly of fleshly desire, entered wine shops in order to encourage those with a will to quit them.

If he was among rich men, they honored him as foremost among them because he preached the superior Law for them. If he was among lay believers, they honored him as foremost because he freed them from greed and attachment. Among Kshatriyas he was most highly honored because he taught them forbearance. Among Brahmans he was most highly honored because he rid them of their self-conceit. The great ministers honored him as foremost because he taught the correct Law. The princes honored him as foremost because he showed them how to be loyal and filial. Within the women's quarters he was most honored because he converted and brought refinement to the women of the harem.

The common people honored him as first among them because he helped them to gain wealth and power. The Brahma deities honored him as first among them because he revealed the superiority of wisdom. The Indras honored him as first among them because he demonstrated the truth of impermanence. The Four Heavenly Kings, guardians of the world, honored him as foremost because he guarded all living beings.

In this way the rich man Vimalakirti employed immeasurable numbers of expedient means in order to bring benefit to others. Using these expedient means, he made it appear that his body had fallen prey to illness. Because of his illness, the king of the country, the great ministers, rich men, lay believers, and Brahmans, as well as the princes and lesser officials, numbering countless thousands, all went to see him and inquire about his illness.

Vimalakirti then used this bodily illness to expound the Law to them in broad terms: "Good people, this body is impermanent, without durability, without strength, without firmness, a thing that decays in a moment, not to be relied on. It suffers, it is tormented, a meeting place of manifold ills.

"Good people, no person of enlightened wisdom could depend on a thing like this body This body is like a cluster of foam, nothing you can grasp or handle. This body is like a bubble that cannot continue for long. This body is like a flame born of longing and desire. This body is like the plantain that has no firmness in its trunk. This body is like a phantom, the product of error and confusion. This body is like a dream, compounded of false and empty visions. This body is like a shadow, appearing through karma causes. This body is like an echo, tied to causes and conditions. This body is like a drifting cloud, changing and vanishing in an instant. This body is like lightning, barely lasting from moment to moment.

"This body is like earth that has no subjective being. This body is like fire, devoid of ego. This body is like wind that has no set life span. This body is like water, devoid of individuality.

"This body has no reality but makes these four elements its lodging. This body is void, removed from self and self's possessions. This body is without understanding, like plants or trees, tiles or pebbles. This body is without positive action, blown about by the wind. This body is impure, crammed with defilement and evil. This body is empty and unreal; though for a time you may bathe and cleanse, clothe and feed it, in the end it must crumble and fade. This body is plague-ridden, beset by a hundred and one ills and anxieties. This body is like the abandoned well on the hillside, old age pressing in on it. This body has no fixity, but is destined for certain death. This body is like poisonous snakes, vengeful bandits, or an empty village, a mere coming together of components, realms, and sense-fields.

"Good people, a thing like, this is irksome and hateful, and therefore you should seek the Buddha body. Why? Because the Buddha body is the Dharma body. It is born from immeasurable merits and wisdom. It is born from precepts, meditation, wisdom, emancipation, and the insight of emancipation. It is born from pity, compassion, joy, and indifference. It is born of the various paramitas such as almsgiving, keeping of the precepts, forbearance and gentleness, assiduousness in religious practice, meditation, emancipation and samadhi, wide knowledge and wisdom. It is born of expedient means, born of the six transcendental powers, born of the three understandings, born of the thirty-seven elements of the Way, born of concentration and insight, born of the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, and the eighteen unshared properties. It is born of the cutting off of all things not good and the gathering in of all good things, born of the truth, born of the avoidance of indulgence and laxity. The body of the Thus Come One is born of immeasurable numbers of pure and spotless things such as these.

"Good people, if you wish to gain the Buddha body and do away with the ills that afflict all living beings, then you must set your minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi."

In this manner the rich man Vimalakirti used the occasion to preach the Law to those who came to inquire about his illness. As a result, numberless thousands of persons were all moved to set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.

Chapter 3
THE DISCIPLES
At that time the rich man Vimalakirti thought to himself: "I am lying here sick in bed. Why does the World-Honored One in his great compassion fail to show some concern for me?"

The Buddha, aware of this thought, said to Shariputra, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

But Shariputra replied to the Buddha in these words: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I recall one occasion in the past when I was sitting in quiet meditation under a tree in the forest.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Shariputra, you should not assume that this sort of sitting is true quiet sitting! Quiet sitting means that in this threefold world you manifest neither body nor will. This is quiet sitting. Not rising out of your samadhi of complete cessation and yet showing yourself in the ceremonies of daily life-this is quiet sitting. Not abandoning the principles of the Way and yet showing yourself in the activities of a common mortal-this is quiet sitting. Your mind not fixed on internal things and yet not engaged with externals either-this is quiet sitting. Unmoved by sundry theories, but practicing the thirty-seven elements of the Way-this is quiet sitting. Entering nirvana without having put an end to earthly desires-this is quiet sitting. If you can do this kind of sitting, you will merit the Buddha's seal of approval.'

"At that time, World-Honored One, when I heard him speak these words, I remained silent, for I had no way to reply to them. That is why I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Maudgalyayana, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

But Maudgalyayana replied to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I recall how in the past I entered the great city of Vaishali and in its streets and lanes expounded the Dharma for the lay believers.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Maudgalyayana, when you expound the Dharma for the white-robed lay believers, you should not expound it the way you are doing! Expounding the Dharma should be done in accordance with the Dharma [reality] itself.

"'The Dharma knows nothing of living beings, because it is removed from the defilement of such concepts as "living beings." The Dharma knows nothing of "I," because it is removed from the defilement of such concepts as "I." It knows nothing of a life span, because it knows nothing of birth and death. It knows nothing of individuality, because it is cut off from considerations of past or future lives. The Dharma is forever still and serene, because it has wiped out all characteristics. The Dharma is without characteristics, because it is without anything that can be perceived. The Dharma is without names or appellations, because it is cut off from all language. The Dharma is without any expounding, because it is removed from broad or minute contemplation by the mind. The Dharma is without forms or characteristics, because it is as though vacant and empty. The Dharma is not the subject of frivolous theories, because in the end it is empty. The Dharma is without the concept of "mine," because it is removed from all such concepts of personal possession. The Dharma is without distinctions, because it is apart from all types of consciousness. The Dharma has nothing it can compare to, because there is no entity that can be set beside it.

"'The Dharma is not affected by causes, because it does not exist in a conditioned realm. The Dharma is identical with the Dharma-nature, because it enters into all phenomena [dharmas]. The Dharma conforms with what is truly so, because there is nothing else to conform to. The Dharma abides in the locus of reality, being unaffected by anything on the periphery. The Dharma is without motion or wavering, never depending on the six sense objects. The Dharma is without coming or going, since it never abides anywhere to begin with.

"'The Dharma accords with emptiness, follows what is formless, responds to what is actionless. The Dharma is separate from beautiful or ugly. The Dharma knows no increase or diminution, the Dharma knows no birth or extinction, the Dharma knows no destination. The Dharma transcends eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. The Dharma knows no high or low. The Dharma constantly abides without moving. The Dharma is separate from all meditational practices.

"'Ah, Maudgalyayana, since the characteristics of the Dharma are such as these, how can one expound it? Expounding the Dharma means no expounding, no demonstrating, and listening to the Dharma means no listening, no grasping. It is like a conjurer of phantoms expounding the Dharma for phantom persons. It is with this understanding that you should expound the Dharma.

"'You should take into account that some living beings are keen in capacity while others are dull, cultivate the kind of skilled insight that is free from all impediment, with a mind steeped in great compassion praise the Great Vehicle, and remember the debt of gratitude you owe the Buddha, never allowing the Three Treasures to come to an end. When you have done all this, then you may expound the Dharma.'

"When Vimalakirti expounded the Dharma in this way, eight hundred lay believers set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. I possess no such eloquence as this. Therefore I say that I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Mahakashyapa, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

But Mahakashyapa replied to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I recall how in the past I was begging for alms in a poor village.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Mahakashyapa, you have a mind marked by compassion and pity, but you do not know how to apply it to all alike. Instead you shun the rich and mighty and beg alms among the poor.

"'Mahakashyapa, you must abide by the principle of equanimity and in that spirit go about begging for food. Because in the end there is no such thing as eating, in that spirit one goes about begging for food. Because one wishes to destroy dependence on things characterized by a mere combination of elements, in that spirit one accepts these balls of foodstuff. Because in the end there is no receiving, in that spirit one receives this food.

"'When you enter a village, think of it as an empty village. The forms you see there should appear as they would to a blind man, the sounds you hear should be mere echoes. The aromas you inhale should be so much thin air, the flavors you taste should be undifferentiated.

"'Accept all sensations in accordance with the enlightenment of wisdom, and understand that all phenomena are no more than phantom forms. They have no intrinsic nature, nor do they take on any other nature. l

1 Or, according to another interpretation: "Intrinsically they have never been on fire, and hence will never burn out. "The character jan can mean either "so," or "thus," or "to burn."

"'Mahakashyapa, if, without casting aside the eight errors, you can enter into the eight emancipations; if, while possessing the marks of error, you can enter the correct Law; if with one meal you can feed all beings, offering alms to the Buddhas and the sages and worthy persons, then after that you may eat your food.

"'One who eats in this manner neither possesses earthly desires nor is separated from earthly desires, neither enters into a meditative state of mind nor arises out of such a state, neither dwells in this world nor dwells in nirvana.

"'One who gives alms in this manner derives neither great fortune nor little fortune, neither profit nor loss. This is the correct way to enter the Buddha way without relying on the path of the voice-hearer.

"'Mahakashyapa, if you can eat your food in this manner, then you will not be eating in vain the food that others give you.' "At that time, World-Honored One, when I heard him speak these words, I gained what I had never had before, and I was inspired with a profound respect for all the bodhisattvas. And I thought to myself, 'If this householder possesses such eloquence and wisdom that he can speak like this, then who could listen to him without being moved to set his mind on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi?' From that time on I ceased to urge others to follow the path of the voice-hearer or the pratyekabuddha. That is why I say I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Subhuti, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

But Subhuti replied to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall how in the past I went to his house to beg alms.

"At that time Vimalakirti took my begging bowl, filled it with things, to eat, and said, 'Ah, Subhuti, if one can look on all foods as equal, that person can look on all things as equal, and if one looks on all things as equal, one will look on all foods as equal. If one begs alms in this manner, then one is worthy to receive food.

"'Subhuti, if you can not cut yourself off from lewdness, anger, and stupidity and yet not be a part of these; if you can refrain from destroying the idea of a self and yet see all things as of a single nature; if without wiping out stupidity and attachment you can find your way to understanding and freedom from attachment; if you can seem to be a perpetrator of the five cardinal sins and yet gain emancipation; if you can be neither unbound nor bound, neither one who has perceived the four noble truths nor one who has not perceived them, neither one who obtains the fruits of religious practice nor one who does not obtain them, neither a common mortal nor one who has removed himself from the ways of the common mortal, neither a sage nor not a sage-if in this manner you can master all phenomenal things and yet remove yourself from the ways that mark them, then you will be worthy to receive food.

"'Subhuti, if without seeing the Buddha or listening to his Law you are willing to take those six heretical teachers, Purana Kashyapa, Maskarin Goshaliputra, Samjayin Vairatiputra, Ajita Keshakambala, Kakuda Katyayana, and Nirgrantha Jnatiputra, as your teachers, leave the household life because of them, and follow them in falling into the same errors they fall into, then you will be worthy to receive food.

"'Subhuti, if you can subscribe to erroneous views and thus never reach the "other shore" of enlightenment; if you can remain among the eight difficulties and never escape from difficulty, and can make common cause with earthly desires and remove yourself from a state of purity; if when you attain the samadhi of nondisputation you allow all living beings to attain the same degree of concentration; if those who give you alms are not destined to gain good fortune thereby, and those who make offerings to you fall into the three evil paths of existence; if you are willing to join hands with the host of devils and make the defilements your companion; if you can be no different from all these devils and these dusts and defilements; if you can bear hatred toward all living beings, slander the Buddhas, vilify the Law, not be counted among the assembly of monks, and in the end never attain nirvana-if you can do all this, then you will be worthy to receive food.'

"At that time, World-Honored One, when I heard these words, I was dumbfounded, not knowing what sort of words they were or how to answer them. I put down my alms bowl, intending to leave the house, but Vimalakirti said to me, 'Ah, Subhuti, pick up your alms bowl and do not be afraid. Why do I say this? If some phantom person conjured up by the Thus Come One were to reprimand you as I have just done, you would not be afraid, would you?'

"'No,' I replied.

"Vimalakirti said, 'All things in the phenomenal world are just such phantoms and conjured beings. So you have no cause to feel afraid. Why? Because all words and pronouncements too are no different from these other phantom forms. When a person is wise, he does not cling to words and hence is not afraid of them. Why? Because words are something apart from self-nature-words do not really exist. And this is emancipation. All things of the phenomenal world bear this mark of emancipation.'

"When Vimalakirti expounded the Law in this manner, two hundred heavenly beings gained the purity of the Dharma eye. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Purna Maitrayaniputra, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Purna said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall how once, under a tree in the great forest, I was expounding the Law to some monks who had just begun their study of the Way.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Purna, you should first enter into meditation and observe a person's mind before expounding the Law to that person. One does not put rotten food in a precious vessel. You must determine what thoughts are in the minds of these monks. Do not treat precious lapis lazuli as though it were mere glass!

"'You seem unable to understand the basic capacities of living beings. You must not try to rouse their aspirations by preaching the doctrines of the Lesser Vehicle. Do not inflict injury on those who are without wounds! If you want them to travel the great highway, do not show them a little bypath. Do not try to fit the vast ocean into an ox's hoofprint, do not regard the light of the sun as if it were a firefly's glimmer!

"'Purna, these monks long ago set their minds on the Great Vehicle, but later they forgot their original intentions. Why do you use the doctrines of the Lesser Vehicle to teach and guide them? As I see it, the wisdom of the Lesser Vehicle is trite and shallow, like the understanding of a blind person. It is incapable of discerning whether the capacities of living beings are keen or dull.'

"At that time Vimalakirti entered into samadhi, making it possible for these monks to become aware of their former existences. In the past, under five hundred Buddhas, they had planted the roots of virtue and set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. And at that moment they were suddenly able to regain their original spirit of resolve. With that, the monks bowed their heads at Vimalakirti's feet. Then he preached the Law for them, insuring that they would never again regress in their striving for anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. And I thought to myself that a voice-hearer should never preach the Law when he cannot discern people's inner capacities. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Mahakatyayana, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Mahakatyayana said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall how in the past the Buddha was once summing up for the monks the essential points in his preaching of the Law Later, I expounded and elaborated on what he had said, discussing the meaning of the terms impermanence, suffering, emptiness, non-ego, and tranquil extinction or nirvana.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Mahakatyayana, you must not try to expound on the true nature of phenomena when your mind is concerned with distinctions such as birth or extinction. For in the end all phenomeria know neither birth nor extinction-this is the meaning of impermanence. The five components are wide open, empty, nothing arising in them-this is the meaning of suffering. The various phenomena ultimately have no existence-this is the meaning of emptiness. Ego and non-ego are not two different things-this is the meaning of non-ego. Phenomena have never been "so" to begin with, and hence will never cease to be "so"2-this is the meaning of tranquil extinction.'

2 Or, according to another interpretation: "Things have never been on fire to begin with, so they cannot go out now." See note 1 in this chapter.

"When he expounded the Law in this way, the minds of the monks were able to gain emancipation. That is why I say I am not competent to visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Aniruddha, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Aniruddha said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall how once I was walking around to stretch my legs when a Brahma king named Austere Purity, accompanied by ten thousand Brahmas, all emitting beams of pure light, came to the place where I was. Bowing his head in obeisance, he questioned me, saying, 'Aniruddha, how far can this divine eye of yours see?'3

3 Aniruddha was known among the ten major disciples as foremost in divine sight.

"I replied, 'Sir, I can see this whole thousand-millionfold world, the Buddha land of Shakyamuni, as though I were peering down at a myrobalan fruit in the palm of my hand.'

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Aniruddha, this sight possessed by the divine eye-is it conditioned in nature, or is it unconditioned? If it is conditioned in nature, then it is the same as the five transcendental powers of the non-Buddhist teachers. And if it is unconditioned, then it is uncreated, and hence is incapable of seeing anything.'

"At that time I remained silent. But the Brahmas, hearing his words, gained what they had never had before. At once they made obeisance to him and said, 'In this world, who possesses the true divine eye?'

"Vimalakirti replied, 'Only the Buddha, the World-Honored One, is able to acquire the true divine eye. He is constantly in a state of samadhi and can see all the Buddha lands, because he does not see in terms of duality.'

"Thereupon the Brahma king Austere Purity and his retinue of five hundred Brahma deities all set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. They bowed at Vimalakirti's feet and then suddenly were seen no more. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness.'

The Buddha then said to Upali, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Upali replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall once in the past when two monks had violated the rules of conduct and were feeling ashamed of themselves but did not dare ask the Buddha what to do. So they came to me and said, 'Ah, Upali, we have violated the precepts and are truly ashamed, but we do not dare ask the Buddha what to do. Please free us from our doubts and remorse and tell us how we can be excused from blame.'4

4 Upali was known as foremost in observing the precepts.

"I explained to them how one goes about gaining pardon according to the Law But at that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Upali, do not make the offense these monks have committed even worse than it is ! You should go about wiping out their doubts and remorse at once and not trouble their minds further!

"'Why do I say this? Because their offense by its nature does not exist either inside them, or outside, or in between. As the Buddha has taught us, when the mind is defiled, the living being will be defiled. When the mind is pure, the living being will be pure. As the mind is, so will be the offense or defilement. The same is true of all things, for none escape the realm of Suchness.

"'Now, Upali, if one gains emancipation from delusion through an understanding of the nature of the mind, does any defilement remain?'

"'No,' I replied.

"Vimalakirti said, 'In the same way, when all living beings gain an understanding of the nature of the mind, then no defilement exists. Ah, Upali, deluded thoughts are defilement. Where there are no deluded thoughts, that is purity. Topsy-turvy thinking is defilement. Where there is no topsy-turvy thinking, that is purity. Belief in the self is defilement. Where there is no such belief, that is purity.

"'Upali, all phenomena are born and pass into extinction, never enduring, like phantoms, like lightning. They do not wait for one another or linger for an instant. All phenomena are the product of deluded vision, like dreams, like flames, like the moon in the water or an image in a mirror, born of deluded thoughts. One who understands this is called a keeper of the precepts, one who understands this is called well liberated.'

"At this, the two monks exclaimed, `Superlative wisdom! Upali could never match this; he who is "foremost in observing the precepts" could never speak like this!' And I added, 'Leaving the Thus Come One aside, no voice-hearer or bodhisattva has ever commanded such eloquence in apt exposition. See how clear and penetrating his wisdom is!'

"At that time the doubts and remorse of the two monks were wiped away and they set their minds on the attainment of anut-tara-samyak-sambodhi, vowing that 'We will enable all living beings to gain eloquence such as this!' Therefore I say I am not competent to visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Rahula, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Rahula said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall how once in the past the sons of the wealthy men of Vaishali came to the place where I was, bowed their heads in obeisance, and questioned me. 'Ah, Rahula,' they said, 'you are the Buddha's son, but you cast aside your claim to the rank of a wheel-turning king and left the household life to become a monk. What benefits does one acquire by leaving the household life?'

"I explained to them the benefits and blessings one gains by leaving the household life as the Law describes them. But at that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Rahula, you should not speak of the benefits and blessings gained by leaving the household life. Why? Because to be without benefits and without blessings is to leave household life.

"'In the case of things that are conditioned in nature one may speak of them as having benefits and blessings. But one who leaves household life enters the realm of the unconditioned, and in the realm of the unconditioned there are no benefits, no blessings.

"'Rahula, leaving the household life is not that, not this, and not in between. It means abandoning the sixty-two erroneous views to reside in nirvana; it is accepted by the wise and carried out by the sages. It means conquering and subduing the host of devils, moving beyond the five realms of existence, purifying the five eyes, acquiring the five powers, and cultivating the five roots of goodness. It means not troubling others but removing oneself from sundry evils, refuting the non-Buddhist doctrines, transcending the realm of makeshift names, shaking off mud and defilement. It is without ties or attachments, without personal possessions, without thought of possessions, without fluster or confusion. It means harboring joy within, guarding the minds of others, pursuing the practice of meditation, and freeing oneself from all fault. If one can do all this, then one has truly left the household.'

"Then Vimalakirti addressed the rich men's sons, saying, 'Now that you are in the midst of the correct Law, you should all join in leaving the household life. Why? Because it is rare to happen on a time when the Buddha is in the world!'

"But the rich men's sons said, 'Layman, we have heard the Buddha say that one must not leave the household life without the permission of one's parents.'

"'In that case, you should set your minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi,' said Vimalakirti. 'That is the same as leaving the household, the same as taking monastic vows.'

"At that time thirty-two rich men's sons all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to Ananda, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Ananda said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness. Why? Because I recall once in the past when the World-Honored One was feeling somewhat ill and needed some cow's milk. I at once took my begging bowl, went to the home of one of the great Brahmans, and stood by the gate. At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Ah, Ananda, what are you doing standing here early in the morning with your begging bowl?'

"I replied, 'Layman, the World-Honored One is suffering from a slight bodily illness and needs some cow's milk. That's why I've come here.'

"But Vimalakirti said, 'Hush, hush, Ananda! Never speak such words! The body of the Thus Come One is diamond-hard in substance. All evils have been cut away, manifold good things gather there. How could it know illness, how could it know distress? Go your way in silence, Ananda, and do not defame the Thus Come One. Don't let others hear you speaking such coarse words! Don't let these heavenly beings of great majesty and virtue and these bodhisattvas who have come from the pure lands of other regions hear such utterances!

"'Ananda, even a wheel-turning sage king with his few blessings is still able to exempt himself from illness. How much more so, then, the Thus Come One, in whom immeasurable blessings meet, the surpasser of all! Be on your way, Ananda, and do not inflict this shame on us.

"'If the non-Buddhists and Brahmans should hear such talk they would think to themselves: "Why call this man Teacher? He cannot save himself from illness, so how could he save others from their illnesses?" Slip away quickly now so no one will hear what you have said!

"'Ananda, you should know that the body of the Thus Come One is the Dharma body, not the body of the world of thought and desires. The Buddha is the World-Honored One who transcends the threefold world. The Buddha body is free of out-flows, for all its outflows have been cut off. The Buddha body is unconditioned and does not fall within the realm of destinies. A body such as this-how could it know illness, how could it know distress?'

"At that time, World-Honored One, I felt truly ashamed and thought, I must go to the Buddha and ask if I heard him incorrectly. But at that moment I heard a voice in the sky saying, 'Ananda, it is as the layman has said. But the Buddha has appeared in this evil world of five impurities and at present is practicing the Law so as to save and liberate living beings. Go, Ananda, get the milk and do not feel ashamed!'

"But, World-Honored One, Vimalakirti commands such wisdom and eloquence as this! That is why I say I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

Thus all five hundred of the major disciples one by one described to the Buddha some earlier experience and the words that Vimalakirti had spoken on that occasion, each declaring, "I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

Chapter 4
THE BODHISATTVAS
The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Maitreya, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

But Maitreya replied to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I recall how once in the past I was preaching to the king of the Tushita heaven and his followers on the practices required to attain the state of nonregression.

"At that time Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'Maitreya, the World-Honored One prophesied that with one more birth you will be able to attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Now just what birth does this prophecy apply to? Does it apply to your past birth, your future birth, or your present birth?

"'If it applies to a past birth, that past birth has already passed into extinction. If it applies to a future birth, that future birth has yet to arrive. And if it applies to a present birth, this present birth lacks permanence. For, as the Buddha has said, "Monks, one moment you are born, the next you grow old, the next you pass into extinction.'

"'Or does the prophecy apply to the state of birthlessness? But birthlessness is none other than the state of Correct Realization, and the stage of Correct Realization can have nothing to do with prophecies of enlightenment or with the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. So how, Maitreya, can you be given this prophecy about "one birth"?

"'Were you given this prophecy because of some birth that pertains to Suchness? Or were you given this prophecy because of some extinction that pertains to Suchness? If you were given this prophecy because of some birth that pertains to Suchness, you should know that in Suchness there is no birth. And if you were given this prophecy because of some extinction that pertains to Suchness, you should know that in Suchness there is no extinction.

"'All living beings are a part of Suchness, and all other things as well are a part of Suchness. The sages and worthy ones too are a part of Suchness; even you, Maitreya, are a part of Suchness. So if you have been given a prophecy of enlightenment, then all living beings should likewise be given such a prophecy. Why? Because Suchness knows no dualism or differentiation. If you, Maitreya, are able to attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, then all living beings should likewise be able to attain it. Why? Because all living beings in truth bear the marks of bodhi. If you, Maitreya, are able to gain nirvana, then all living beings should likewise be able to gain it. Why? Because the Buddhas know that all living beings bear the marks of tranquil extinction, which is nirvana, and that there is no further extinction. Therefore, Maitreya, you must not use doctrines such as this to mislead these offspring of the gods. For in truth there is no such thing as setting one's mind on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi or of attaining the state of nonregression.

"'Maitreya, you should persuade these offspring of the gods to abandon any view that makes distinctions concerning bodhi. Why? Because bodhi is not something that can be acquired by the body, or acquired by the mind.

"'Tranquil extinction is bodhi, for in it all marks become extinct. Noncontemplation is bodhi, for it is divorced from all causes. Nonaction is bodhi, for it is devoid of thought and mental activity Cutting off is bodhi, for it abandons all views. Removal is bodhi, for it means the removal of all deluded thoughts.

"'Blocking is bodhi, because it blocks out all aspiration. Non-involvement is bodhi, because it is without greed or attachment. Compliance is bodhi, because it complies with Suchness. Abiding is bodhi, because it abides in the Dharma-nature.

"'Extending is bodhi, for it extends to the limit of reality. Nonduality is bodhi, for it is removed from thoughts and thought objects. Equality is bodhi, for in it all is equally empty and void. The unconditioned is bodhi, for it knows no birth, abiding, or extinction. Understanding is bodhi, for it fully comprehends the mental activities of living beings.

"Nonengagement is bodhi, because it enters into no kind of engagement with objects. Nonparticipation is bodhi, because it has freed itself from the habits of earthly desire. The dwellingless is bodhi, because it lacks shape or form. The provisionally named is bodhi, because names and words are void.

"'Phantomlike is bodhi, for it neither grasps nor lets go. Untroubled is bodhi, for it is forever still of itself. Good tranquillityl is bodhi, for it is pure in nature. Ungrasping is bodhi; for it is removed from distracting causes. Nondifferentiation is bodhi, for in it all phenomena are equal. Incomparable is bodhi, for no simile can convey it. Subtle and wonderful is bodhi, for phenomena are hard to understand.'

"World-Honored One, when Vimalakirti expounded the Law in this fashion, two hundred offspring of the gods were able to grasp the truth of birthlessness. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Shining Adornment, a young boy, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Shining Adornment replied to the Buddha: "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I remember once in the past when I was leaving the great city of Vaishali. Vimalakirti was just then entering the city, and I accordingly bowed to him and said, 'Layman, where are you coming from?'

"He replied, 'I am coming from the place of practice.'

1 Some texts read "The tranquillity of meditation."

"'The place of practice-where is that?' I asked.

"He replied, 'An upright mind is the place of practice, for it is without sham or falsehood. The resolve to act is the place of practice, for it can judge matters properly. A deeply searching mind is the place of practice, for it multiplies benefits. The mind that aspires to bodhi is the place of practice, for it is without error or misconception.

"'Almsgiving is the place of practice, because it hopes for no reward. Observance of the precepts is the place of practice, because it brings fulfillment of vows. Forbearance is the place of practice, because it enabJes one to view all living beings with a mind free of obstruction. Assiduousness is the place of practice, because it forestalls laziness and regression. Meditation is the place of practice, because it makes the mind tame and gentle. Wisdom is the place of practice, because it sees all things as they are.

"'Pity is the place of practice, for it views all living beings equally. Compassion is the pJace of practice, for it bears up under weariness and pain. Joy is the place of practice, for it revels in Dharma delight. Indifference is the place of practice, for it rejects both hatred and love.

"'Transcendental powers are the place of practice, because thereby one masters the six powers. Emancipation is the place of practice, because it knows how to renounce and set aside. Expedient means are the place of practice, because they can teach and convert living beings. The four methods of winning people are the place of practice, because they can win living beings over. Much learning is the place of practice, because one carries out what one has learned. A disciplined mind is the place of practice, because one can thereby contempJate all phenomena correctly The thirty-seven elements of the Way are the place of practice, because through them, one rejects what is conditioned. Truth2 is the place of practice, because it does not deceive the world.

2 Some texts read "The four noble truths."

"'Causes and conditions are the place of practice, for none of the links in the chain of causation, from ignorance to old age and death, ever come to an end. Earthly desires are the place of practice, for through them we know the nature of Suchness. Living beings are the place of practice, for through them we know that there is no ego. All phenomena are the place of practice, for through them we know the emptiness of all phenomena.

"'Conquering devils is the place of practice, because one is unswayed, unflinching. The threefold world is the place of practice, because there is no path for one there. The lion's roar is the place of practice, because it has nothing it fears. The ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, the eighteen unshared properties are the place of practice, because they are free of all fault. The three understandings are the place of practice, because they are without the least obstruction. Understanding all phenomena in one instant of thought is the place of practice, because one thereby becomes master of all wisdom.

"'My good fellow, if bodhisattvas apply themselves to the paramitas and teach and convert living beings, then you should understand that everything they do, every lifting of a foot, every placing of a foot, will in effect be a "coming from the place of practice," an abiding in the Buddha's Law.'

"When Vimalakirti preached the Law in this manner, five hundred heavenly and human beings all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

The Buddha then said to the bodhisattva Upholder of the Age, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness." But Upholder of the Age said to the Buddha: "World-Honored

One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness. Why? Because I recall once when I was staying in my quiet room. At that time the devil king Papiyas, accompanied by twelve thousand heavenly maidens, appeared in the guise of the god Indra. Playing on musical instruments and singing, they came to where I was, and then the devil and his retinue bowed their heads at my feet, pressed their palms together, and stood to one side.

"I thought it was Indra, and I said to him, 'Welcome, Kaushika.3 Though you enjoy good fortune, you should never behave willfully. You should contemplate the impermanence of the five desires and strive thereby to plant good roots. With body, life, and resources you should cultivate the steadfast Law.'

"But Indra said to me, 'Upright one, please accept these twelve thousand heavenly maidens. They can serve and wait on you.' "I replied, 'Kaushika, a monk, a son of Shakyamuni, has no use for unlawful things such as these. It would not be right for me to accept them.'

"Before I had finished speaking, Vimalakirti approached and said to me, 'This is not Indra. This is only a devil who has come tó trouble and vex you.' Then he said to the devil, 'You may give these women to me. It is quite all right for me to accept them.'

"The devil was alarmed and fearful, thinking that Vimalakirti was perhaps going to make trouble for him. He tried to hide him-self and escape, but he could not make himself invisible. Though he exhausted all his supernatural powers, he could not get away

"Just then a voice was heard in the sky saying, 'Papiyas, give him the women. Then you can escape.'

"The devil, terrified, looked this way and that and then handed over the women. Vimalakirti then addressed the women, saying, 'The devil has given you to me. Now it is proper that you should all set your minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.'

"Then, adopting whatever approach was appropriate, he expounded the Law to them, awakening in them a desire for the Way. Then he said, 'Nów that you have conceived a desire for the Way, you may regale yourselves with Dharma delight and need no longer delight in the pleasures of the five desires.'

3 Kaushika is another name for Indra.

"The heavenly maidens asked, 'What is this you call Dharma delight?'

"Vimalakirti replied, 'To delight in constant faith in the Buddha, to delight in the desire to hear the Law, to delight in giving alms to the assembly, to delight in casting off the five desires, to delight in viewing the five components as vengeful bandits, to delight in viewing the four great elements as poisonous snakes, to delight in viewing the mind and the senses as an empty village, to delight in pursuing and guarding a desire for the Way, to delight in benefiting living beings, to delight in honoring and supporting teachers, to delight in practicing widespread generosity, to delight in strict observance of the precepts, to delight in patience, humility, gentleness, and harmony, to delight in diligently amassing good roots, to delight in meditation that is never disordered, to delight in bright, undefiled wisdom, to delight in broadening the mind that aspires to bodhi, to delight in conquering and subduing devils, to delight in cutting off all earthly desires, to delight in purifying the Buddha lands, to delight in gaining merits so that one may in time succeed in acquiring auspicious marks and characteristics, to delight in adorning the place of practice, to delight in listening fearlessly to profound teachings, to delight in the three gates to emancipation and not to delight in untimely teachings, to delight in being friendly with those of like learning, to delight in a mind free of anger and hostility when among those of unlike learning, to delight in guiding and protecting evil friends, to delight in being friendly with good friends, to delight in a mind that finds joy in purity, to delight in practicing the teachings regarding the immeasurable elements of the Way-these make up the Dharma delight of the bodhisattva.'

"Papiyas then addressed the women, saying, 'I want now to return with you to my heavenly palace.' But the women said ,

'You gave us to this layman. Possessing this Dharma delight that affords us such pleasure, we no longer delight in the pleasures of the five desires.'

"The devil said, 'Layman, you should give up these women. He who gives all he possesses as a gift to others is a bodhisattva.'

"Vimalakirti replied, 'I have already given them up. You may take them away, and may you enable all living beings to fulfill their desire for the Dharma!'

"But the women said to Vimalakirti, 'How can we remain in the palace of the devil?'

"Vimalakirti replied, 'Sisters, there is a teaching called the Inexhaustible Lamp. You must study it. This Inexhaustible Lamp is like a single lamp that lights a hundred or a thousand other lamps, till the darkness is all made bright with a brightness that never ends. In this same way, sisters, one bodhisattva guides and opens a path for a hundred or a thousand living beings, causing them to set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. And this desire for the Way will never be extinguished or go out. By following the teaching as it has been preached, one keeps adding until one has acquired all good teachings. This is what is called the Inexhaustible Lamp.

"'Although you live in the palace of the devil, with this Inexhaustible Lamp you can enable countless heavenly sons and heavenly daughters to set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Thus you will repay the debt of gratitude you owe the Buddha and at the same time bring great benefit to all living beings.'

"At that time the heavenly maidens bowed their heads at Vimalakirti's feet and then accompanied the devil back to his palace, suddenly disappearing from sight. World-Honored One, such are the freely commanded supernatural powers, wisdom, and eloquence that Vimalakirti possesses! Therefore I say I am not competent to visit him."

The Buddha then said to Good Virtue, one of the wealthy men's sons, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and ask about his illness."

But Good Virtue said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, I am not competent to visit him and inquire about his illness.

Why? Because I recall once when a great bestowal gathering4 was held at my father's house, where for a period of seven days alms were given out to all the monks, Brahmans and non-Buddhist believers, and to poor and humble folk, orphans, friendless persons and beggars.

"At that time Vimalakirti, who had joined the gathering, said to me, 'You are a wealthy man's son-you should not be holding a great bestowal gathering such as this. You should hold a gathering for Dharma bestowal. Why hold a gathering for the bestowal of mere material goods?'

"'Layman,' I said, 'what do you mean by a gathering for Dharma bestowal?'

"He replied, 'A gathering for Dharma bestowal is one which has no beginning and no end, in which alms are given out simultaneously to all living beings. What does this mean? It means that through bodhi one cultivates a loving mind, through saving living beings one cultivates a mind of great compassion, through adherence to the correct Law one cultivates a joyful mind, and through one's grasp of wisdom one exercises an indifferent mind.

"'By controlling stinginess and greed one carries out the paramita of dana or almsgiving, by converting those who violate the precepts one carries out the paramita of shila or keeping of the precepts, through the doctrine of no ego one carries out the paramita of kshanti or forbearance, by dispelling attachment to the characteristics of body and mind one carries out the paramita of virya or assiduousness, through an understanding of the nature of bodhi one carries out the paramita of dhyana or meditation, and through compřehensive wisdom one carries out the paramita of prajna or wisdom.

"'By teaching and converting living beings one comes to understand emptiness, by not casting aside conditioned phenomena one comes to understand formlessness, by recognizing that living beings take on visible form one comes to understand nonaction.

A Brahmanical ceremony marked by sacrifices to the gods and the dispensing of charity to those pursuing the religious life and to needy persons

"'By guarding and upholding the correct Law one acquires the power of expedient means, by rescuing living beings one acquires the four methods of winning people, by respecting and serving others one learns how to banish pride.

"'With regard to body, life, and wealth, one follows the doctrine that these three are indestructible;s with regard to the six objects of reverence, one follows the method of thoughtful meditation; with regard to the six types of harmonious respect one cultivates a straightforward mind. By correctly practicing the good Law one achieves a pure way of life; through purity of mind, joy and delight one draws near to the worthy ones and sages; by not hating evil persons one learns to temper and discipline one's mind.

"'By following the rules for those who have left the household life one cultivates a deeply searching mind; by carrying out religious practices in the prescribed way one acquires much learning; by observing ways that are free from contention one creates peaceful and uncrowded surroundings; by directing one's efforts toward Buddha wisdom one learns quiet meditation; by freeing living beings from their bonds one creates a setting for religious practice.

"'Acquiring auspicious marks and purifying the Buddha lands, one pursues actions that bring blessing and good fortune; understanding the minds and thoughts of all living beings and preaching the Law to them in an appropriate manner, one pursues actions that bring wisdom; understanding that all phenomena are neither to be seized nor rejected, one enters the doctrinal gate of the single nature of all phenomena and pursues wise actions; cutting off all earthly desires, all blocks and hindrances, all doctrines that are not good, one pursues all manner of good works; acquiring all types of wisdom, all good doctrines, one cultivates all the methods that aid one to the Buddha way.6

5 Not the ordinary body but the true or eternal body, etc.

"'This, my good man, is what I mean by a gathering for Dharma bestowal. If one is a bodhisattva and abides in such a gathering for Dharma bestowal, he may be deemed a great donor of alms, and he will also be creating a field of blessings for all the world.'

"World-Honored One, when Vimalakirti expounded the Law in this fashion, two hundred of the Br,ahmans gathered there all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. At that time my mind gained a purity I had never known before and I sighed with delight. Bowing my head in obeisance at the feet of Vimalakirti, I took off my jeweled necklace worth hundreds and thousands in gold and presented it to him, but he was unwilling to accept it.

"'Layman,' I said, "I beg you by all means to accept this and to dispose of it as you wish.'

"Vimalakirti then accepted the necklace and divided it into two parts. One part he gave to the lowliest beggars in the assembly, and one part he presented to the Thus Come One Rarely Surpassed. At that time all the members of the gathering were able to see Thus Come One Rarely Surpassed in his land called Light Bright, and they could also see the necklace placed on his person. Then the necklace changed into a jeweled dias fitted with four pillars, richly adorned on four sides but without screens or obstructions enclosing it.

6 There are places in this troublesome passage where cause and effect seem to be in the reverse of their logical order; for example, one would expect the text to say that because one possesses a mind of great compassion, one seeks to save living beings, not that through saving living beings one acquires a mind of great compassion. But the Chinese seems to be saying the latter, and translations of the Tibetan version bear out this interpretation of the syntax throughout the passage. Note that Charles Luk, apparently in an effort to avoid such difficulties, in his translation of the Chinese (p. 46) arbitrarily reverses the order of cause and effect in the latter part of the passage.

"Vimalakirti, having worked these supernatural wonders, then spoke these words:'If a donor of alms bestows gifts on the lowliest beggars with equality of mind, dispensing them with impartiality as the Thus Come One does in his field of blessings; if one exercises great compassion in equal measure without seeking reward or recompense, this may be called a perfectly performed Dharma bestowal.'

"Then the lowliest beggars in the city, seeing these displays of supernatural power and hearing the words of doctrine that Vimalakirti had spoken, all set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Therefore I say I am not competent to visit him and ask about his illness."

In this manner the various bodhisattvas one by one described to the Buddha some past encounter with Vimalakirti and praised the words he had spoken on that occasion, and all declared that they were not competent to visit him and ask about his illness.

Chapter 5
INQUIRING ABOUT THE ILLNESS
At that time the Buddha said to Manjushri, "You must go visit Vimalakirti and inquire about his illness."

Manjushri replied to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, that eminent man is very difficult to confront. He is profoundly enlightened in the true nature of reality and skilled at preaching the essentials of the Law. His eloquence never falters, his wisdom is free of impediments. He understands all the rules of bodhisattva conduct, and nothing in the secret storehouse of the Buddhas is beyond his grasp. He has overcome the host of devils and disports himself with transcendental powers. In wisdom and expedient means he has mastered all there is to know. Nevertheless, in obedience to the Buddha's august command, I will go visit him and inquire about his illness."

Then the bodhisattvas and major disciples in the assembly, the Brahmas, Indras, and Four Heavenly Kings, all thought to themselves: "Now these two great men, Manjushri and Vimalakirti, will be talking together, and they will surely expound the wonderful Law!"At that time eight thousand bodhisattvas, five hundred voice-hearers, and hundreds and thousands of heavenly beings all decided at once that they would like to accompany Manjushri on his visit.

Manjushri, with this throng of bodhisattvas, major disciples, and heavenly beings reverently surrounding and accompanying him, proceeded to enter the city of Vaishali.

At that time the rich man Vimalakirti thought to himself, "Now Manjushri is coming with that great assembly!"At once he employed his supernatural powers to empty the room, clearing it of all its contents and his attendants, leaving only a single bed on which he lay in sickness.

When Manjushri entered the house, he saw that the room was bare of contents, with just one bed, Vimalakirti lying alone on it. Vimalakirti said, "Welcome, Manjushri! You come without the marks of coming, you see me without the marks of seeing me."

Manjushri said, "Just so, layman. What has already come can hardly be coming. And what has already departed can hardly be departing. What do I mean? What comes has nowhere it comes from, what departs has nowhere it goes, and what is seen cannot be further seen.l But let us put that aside for the moment.

"Layman, this illness of yours-can you endure it? Is the treatment perhaps not making it worse rather than better? The World-Honored One countless times has made solicitous inquiries concerning you. Layman, what is the cause of this illness? Has it been with you long? And how can it be cured?"

Vimalakirti replied, "This illness of mine is born of ignorance and feelings of attachment. Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick. If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings enters the realm of birth and death, and because he is in the realm of birth and death he suffers illness. If living beings can gain release from illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill.

"It is like the case of a rich man who has only one child. If the child falls ill, then the father and mother too will be ill, but if the child's illness is cured, the father and mother too will be cured. The bodhisattva is like this, for he loves living beings as though they were his children. If living beings are sick, the bodhisattva will be sick, but if living beings are cured, the bodhisattva too will be cured. You ask what cause this illness arises from-the illness of the bodhisattva arises from his great compassion."

1 Vimalakirti and Manjushri do a brief pas de deux on the theme of non-dualism before entering on their main dialogue.

Manjushri said, "Layman, why is this room empty and without attendants?"

Vimalakirti replied, "The lands of the Buddhas too are all empty "

"Why are they empty?"

"They are empty because of emptiness," Vimalakirti replied. "And why is emptiness empty?" asked Manjushri.

"It is empty of distinctions, therefore it is empty," was the reply.

"Can emptiness itself be the subject of distinctions?" asked Manjushri.

"Distinctions too are empty," was the reply.

"How then is emptiness to be sought?" asked Manjushri. "It may be sought in the sixty-two erroneous views of the non-Buddhists," was the reply

"How are the sixty-two views to be sought?" asked Manjushri.

"They may be sought in the emancipation of the Buddhas", was the reply.

"And how is the emancipation of the Buddhas to be sought?" asked Manjushri.

"It may be sought in the minds and actions of all living beings," replied Vimalakirti. "And you asked why I am without attendants. But in fact the whole host of devils and the non-Buddhist believers are all my attendants. Why? Because the host of devils delight in the realm of birth and death, and while the bodhisattva is in the realm of birth and death he does not scorn their company. The non-Buddhist believers delight in various views of reality, and the bodhisattva knows how to remain unmoved by such views."

Manjushri said, "This illness of yours, layman-what form does it take?"

"My illness has no form," replied Vimalakirti. "It cannot be seen."

Manjushri said, "Is this illness seated in the body or in the mind?"

"It is not seated in the body, for it is apart from bodily form", replied Vimalakirti. "And it is not seated in the mind, for the mind is a phantomlike thing."

"Of the four major elements, earth, water, fire, and wind, to which of these elements does this illness pertain?" asked Manjushri.

Vimalakirti replied, "This illness does not pertain to the element earth, but neither is it separated from the element earth. And the same may be said of the elements water, fire, and wind. Yet the illnesses of living beings arise from the four elements. And because living beings have these illnesses, therefore I too am ill."

Then Manjushri asked Vimalakirti, "How should a bodhisattva go about comforting and instructing another bodhisattva who is ill?"

Vimalakirti replied, "Tell him about the impermanence of the body, but do not tell him to despise or turn away from the body. Tell him about the sufferings of the body, but do not tell him to strive for nirvana. Tell him that the body is without ego, but urge him to teach and guide living beings. Tell him of the emptiness of the body, but do not tell him of its final extinction. Tell him to repent of former offenses, but do not tell him to consign them to the past. Tell him to use his own illness as a means of sympathizing with the illness of others, for he should understand their sufferings throughout the countless kalpas of their past existence, and should think how he can bring benefit to all living beings. Tell him to recall the good fortune he has won through religious practice, to concentrate on a life of purity, and not to give way to gloom or worry. He should cultivate constant diligence, striving to become a king of physicians who can heal the ailments of the assembly. This is how a bodhisattva should comfort and instruct a bodhisattva who is ill so as to make him feel happy"

Manjushri said, "Layman, how should a bodhisattva who is ill go about tempering and controlling his mind?"

Vimalakirti replied, "A bodhisattva who is ill should think to himself: 'Now these illnesses of mine all spring from the deluded thoughts, the upside-down thinking and various earthly desires of my past existence. They have no real existence, so who is it who suffers illness? Why? The four major elements come together, and therefore we apply a makeshift name, calling the thing a body. But the four major elements have no master, and the body has no "I" or ego. And these illnesses too all arise from attachment to ego. Therefore I should harbor no such attachment to ego.'

"Once one has understood the origin of illness, one may do away with the thought of an I or ego, and the thought of other living beings. To do so, one should call up the thought of phenomena, thinking to oneself: 'It is simply that various phenomena have come together to form this body. It has appeared simply because phenomena appeared, and it will vanish simply because phenomena vanish. And these phenomena are none of them known to one another. When they appear, they do not say, "I have appeared!," and when they vanish, they do not say, "I have vanished!"

"Then, in order to wipe out the thought of phenomena, the ailing bodhisattva should think to himself: 'This thought or concept of phenomena too is a form of upside-down thinking, and upside-down thinking can lead to great misfortune. I must rid myself of it. But how to rid myself of it? By ridding myself of thoughts of I and mine, which means ridding myself of dualism.'

"What is meant by ridding oneself of dualism? It means not thinking of phenomena as internal or external, but treating all as equal. What is meant by equal? It means that I and nirvana are treated as equal. Why? Because I and nirvana are both empty. Why are they empty? Because they are mere names, hence empty Neither of these two phenomena has any fixed nature or characteristics. Once one has acquired this kind of equal outlook, one will be freed of all other illness and will have only the illness of emptiness, and the illness of emptiness too is empty.

"This ailing bodhisattva of ours has no sensations of pain or pleasure, and yet he allows himself to feel such sensations, and while the Law of the Buddha is incompletely practiced he does not seek to wipe out such sensations in himself and gain entry into final enlightenment. If he feels pain in his body, he thinks of the living beings in the evil realms of existence and summons up a mind of great compassion, saying to himself: 'I have regulated and controlled myself, and now I must regulate and control other living beings!' But he should simply rid them of their illnesses and not deprive them of anything, merely teaching and guiding them so they can cut off the source of illness.

"What is meant by the source of illness? It means having troublesome entanglements. Where there are troublesome entanglements, these become the source of illness. What are these troublesome entanglements tied to? They are tied to the threefold world. And how does one cut them off? By realizing that there is nothing to grasp at. If one ceases to grasp at any-thing, there will be no more troublesome entanglements.

"What is meant by realizing there is nothing to grasp at? It means having done with dualistic views. What is meant by dualistic views? it means viewing this as internal, or viewing that as external. [Have done with such views] and there will be no more grasping at things.

"Manjushri, this is how the ailing bodhisattva should go about regulating and controlling his mind. By doing so, he cuts off the sufferings of old age, sickness, and death. If he fails to do so, then all his religious practice and accomplishment in the past will be void of wisdom or profit. A person who has overcome a sworn enemy deserves to be called a hero. In the same way, one who has cut off both old age, sickness, and death may be called a bodhisattva.

"This ailing bodhisattva should also think to himself: This illness of mine has no reality, no existence, and the illnesses of other living beings likewise have no reality and no existence/ When he adopts this view, if he should conceive a great compassion that is marked by affection and concern for living beings, he should at once thrust it aside. Why? Because the bodhisattva must rid himself of all earthly passions caused by external defilement when he summons up his great compassion. If his compassion is marked by affection and concern, then he will have feelings of weariness and revulsion toward the realm of birth and death. But if he can put aside affection and concern, he will feel no weariness and revulsion; whatever realm he happens to be born into, he will not be blinded by affection or concern.

"He is not bound by the conditions of his birth, and hence he is able to preach the Law for living beings and liberate them from their bonds. As the Buddha has said, if one is in bonds himself, to suppose he can free others from their bonds is hardly reasonable. But if one is himself free of bonds, it is perfectly reasonable to assume he can free the bonds of others. Therefore the bodhisattva must not conjure up bonds for himself.

"What is meant by bonds and what is meant by liberation? To become infatuated with the taste of meditation is the bondage of the bodhisattva. To be born in this world as a form of expedient means is the liberation of the bodhisattva. Wisdom without expedient means is bondage; wisdom with expedient means is liberation. Expedient means without wisdom is bondage; expedient means with wisdom is liberation.2

2 In this passage, wisdom stands for the correct mental attitude of the bodhisattva in his efforts to lead others to enlightenment, and expedient means stands for the actual methods he employs. The process of liberation or enlightenment is successfully completed only when both attitude and method are correct.

"What is meant by saying that wisdom without expedient means is bondage? It means that, with a mind full of affection and concern, a bodhisattva sets about to adorn the Buddha lands, lead numerous living beings to them, and regulate himself with the doctrines of emptiness, formlessness, and nonaction. This is called the bondage of wisdom without expedient means.

"What is meant by saying that wisdom with expedient means is liberation? It means that, with a mind free of affection and concern, a bodhisattva sets about to adorn the Buddha lands, lead numerous living beings to them, and regulate himself with the doctrines of emptiness, formlessness, and nonaction, never experiencing weariness or revulsion. This is called the liberation of wisdom with expedient means.

"What is meant by saying that expedient means without wisdom is bondage? It means that, while dwelling among the various earthly passions such as greed, anger, and erroneous views, a bodhisattva sets about planting many roots of virtue. This is called the bondage of expedient means without wisdom.

"What is meant by saying that expedient means with wisdom is liberation? It means that, while removing himself from the various earthly passions such as greed, anger, and erroneous views, a bodhisattva sets about planting many roots of virtue, bending all his efforts in the direction of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. This is called the liberation of expedient means with wisdom.

"Manjushri, the ailing bodhisattva should view all phenomena in this way. And he should view the body and realize that it is marked by impermanence, suffering, emptiness, and absence of ego. This is called wisdom. But though his body may be ailing, he should constantly abide in the realm of birth and death, bringing benefit to all living beings and never giving in to weariness or revulsion. This is called expedient means.

"He should further view the body and realize that the body is never rid of illness, that illness is never rid of the body, and that this body and this illness are neither prior nor posterior to one another. This is called wisdom. But though his body is ailing, the bodhisattva never seeks escape into eternal extinction. This is called expedient means.

"Manjushri, the ailing bodhisattva should regulate his mind by not dwelling in such regulation, but he should not dwell in nonregulation of the mind either. Why? Because if he dwells in nonregulation of the mind, this is the way of a stupid person. But if he dwells in regulation of the mind, this is the way of a voice-hearer. Therefore the bodhisattva should dwell neither in regulation nor in nonregulation of the mind. To remove himself from such dualisms is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"To be in the realm of birth and death without following its tainted ways, to dwell in nirvana while not seeking eternal extinction-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. The practice that is neither that of common mortals nor that of worthies and sages-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. The practice that is neither sullied nor pure-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though far transcending the workings of devils, it shows itself in the conquering of numerous devils-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Seeking comprehensive wisdom, yet not seeking it when the time is not right-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"Though he sees that all things are birthless in nature, he does not enter the realm of the absolute-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he sees all in the light of the twelve-linked chain of causation, he can enter into various erroneous views-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he addresses himself to all living beings, he does so without affection or attachment-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he longs to be far removed from the passions, he does not seek this through elimination of the body and mind-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"Though he moves in the threefold world, he does no injury to the Dharma-nature-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

Though he moves in the realm of emptiness, he plants many roots of virtue-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he moves in the realm of formlessness, he yet saves many living beings-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he moves in the realm of nonaction, he manifests himself by taking on a body-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he avoids the arousal of passion, he rouses in himself the determination to do all good deeds-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"Though he practices the six paramitas, he can understand the minds and mental activities of all living beings-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he is master of the six transcendental powers, he does not remove himself from all defilements-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he possesses the four immeasurable qualities of mind, he is not greedy for birth in the Brahma heaven-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he practices meditation, emancipation, and samadhi, he does not accept the rebirth that is consequent on these practices-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"Though he practices the four states of mindfulness, in the end he does not for long remove himself from the objects of such mindfulness, the body, sensations, the mind, and things-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he applies him-self to the four types of correct effort, he does not cease to be assiduous in matters pertaining to body and mind-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he cultivates the four bases of supernatural power, he is already able to wield transcendental powers at will-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he cultivates the five roots of goodness in himself, he can also distinguish whether the roots or capacities of other living beings are keen or dull-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he possesses the five powers [attained through the five roots of goodness], he delights in seeking to acquire the ten powers of a Buddha-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he observes the seven factors of enlightenment, he can understand all the fine points of the Buddha wisdom-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he walks the eightfold holy path, he also delights in walking the immeasurable Buddha way-such is the practice of the bodhisattva.

"Though he practices concentration and insight as methods to aid one to the way, in the end he does not sink into tranquil extinction-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though fully aware that all things are without birth or extinction, he adorns his body with auspicious features-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though outwardly displaying the dignity of a voice-hearer or pratyekabuddha, he never forsakes the Buddha Law-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though aware that all things in the end are pure in nature, he responds to circum-stances by showing himself in bodily form-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though insight tells him that all Buddha lands are eternally tranquil and empty in nature, yet he displays various kinds of pure Buddha lands-such is the practice of the bodhisattva. Though he attains Buddhahood, turns the wheel of the Law, and enters nirvana, in fact he never forsakes the bodhisattva way-such is the practice of the bodhisattva."

When Vimalakirti spoke these words, eight thousand heavenly sons in the great assembly led by Manjushri all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.

Chapter 6
BEYOND COMPREHENSION
At that time Shariputra, observing that there were no seats in Vimalakirti's room, thought to himself: "All these bodhisattvas and major disciples-where are they going to sit?"

The rich man Vimalakirti, knowing what was in his mind, said to Shariputra, "Did you come here for the sake of the Law, or are you just looking for a place to sit?"

"I came for the Law, not for a seat!" said Shariputra.

"Ah, Shariputra," said Vimalaldrti, "a seeker of the Law doesn't concern himself even about life or limb, much less about a seat! A seeker of the Law seeks nothing in the way of form, perception, conception, volition, or consciousness; he seeks nothing in the way of sense-realms or sense-media; he seeks nothing in the threefold world of desire, form, and formlessness.

"Ah, Shariputra, a seeker of the Law does not seek it through attachment to the Buddha, does not seek it through attachment to the Law, does not seek it through attachment to the order. A seeker of the Law does not seek it through recognition of suffering, does not seek it through renunciation of attachments, does not seek it through realization of how to end attachments, or through practice of the Way.l Why? Because the Law has nothing to do with idle theorizing. To declare that one must recognize suffering, renounce attachments, realize how to reach extinction, and practice the Way is mere idle theorizing, not seeking the Law.

1 These are the four noble truths, that existence is suffering, that suffering is caused by craving or attachment, that there is a way to end craving, that it can be done through practice of the eightfold path.

"Ah, Shariputra, the Law is called 'tranquil extinction.' But if one strives for birth followed by extinction, this is seeking birth and extinction, this is not seeking the Law. The Law is called 'unstained.' But if one is stained with the idea of the Law or of nirvana, then one is stained with attachment, and this is not seeking the Law. The Law has no goal of activity, but if one actively pursues the Law, one is pursuing a goal, and this is not seeking the Law. The Law knows no picking and choosing, but if one picks and chooses the Law, this is picking and choosing, not seeking the Law. The Law is independent of place, but if one fixes on the idea of place, this is fixation with place, not a seeking of the Law The Law is called 'formless.' If one tries to know it through form, this is seeking form, not seeking the Law.

"The Law is not something that can be resided in. If one tries to reside in it, this is trying to reside in the Law, not seeking the Law. The Law is not something that can be seen, heard, perceived, or understood. If one tries to see, hear, perceive, and understand it, this is trying to see, hear, perceive, and understand the Law, not seeking the Law. The Law is called 'unconditioned.' If one tries to approach it through the conditioned, this is seeking the conditioned, not seeking the Law

"Therefore, Shariputra, if one would be a seeker of the Law, one must not seek it in anything at all."

When Vimalakirti spoke these words, five hundred heavenly sons gained the purity of the Dharma eye in their perception of phenomena.

At that time the rich man Vimalakirti said to Manjushri, "You have visited countless thousands, ten thousands, billions of asamkhyas of countries. What Buddha lands have the finest and most beautiful lion seats, those endowed with the best quaJities?"

Manjushri replied, "Layman, to the east, beyond countries numerous as the sands of thirty-six Ganges, lies a world called Sumeru Shape. Its Buddha is named Sumeru Lamp King, and he is there now This Buddha's body is eighty-four thousand yojanas in height and the lion seat [he sits on] is eighty-four thousand yojanas high and adorned in the finest fashion."

The rich man Vimalakirti then exercised his transcendental powers and at once that Buddha dispatched thirty-two thousand lion seats, tall, broad, adorned, and pure, and had them brought into Vimalakirti's room, where the bodhisattvas, major disciples, Indras, Brahmas, Four Heavenly Kings and the others saw something they had never seen before. For the room was broad and spacious enough to hold all these thirty-two thou-sand lion seats without the slightest crowding or hindrance. The city of Vaishali and Jambudvipa and the other of the four continents too seemed in no way cramped or inconvenienced, but all appeared just as usual.

At that time Vimalakirti said to Manjushri, "Sit down in one of the lion seats! The bodhisattvas and other distinguished persons -should also sit down, but when they do so they should assume bodies suitabJe to the size of the seat."

The bodhisattvas who had acquired transcendental powers thereupon immediately transformed their shapes, making themselves forty-two yojanas tall, and sat down in the lion seats. But among the bodhisattvas who had newly embarked on their course or the major disciples, there were none who could climb up into the seats.

At that time Vimalakirti said to Shariputra, "Sit down in a lion seat!"

But Shariputra said, "Layman, these seats are too tall and wide-we can't climb up in them!"

Vimalakirti said, "Ah, Shariputra, if you will make obeisance to the Thus Come One Sumeru Lamp King, then you will be able to take a seat."

The bodhisattvas who had newly embarked on their course and the major disciples accordingly made obeisance to the Thus Come One Sumeru Lamp King, and after that they were able to seat themselves in the lion seats.

Shariputra said, "Layman, I have never seen such a thing! A little room like this and still it can hold seats as tall and broad as these! And the city of Vaishali is in no way crowded or obstructed, nor are any of the towns or villages of Jambudvipa or of the other of the four continents cramped or inconvenienced, or the palaces of the heavenly beings, dragon kings and spirits i "

Vimalakirti said, "Ah, Shariputra, the Buddhas and bodhisattvas have an emancipation that is called Beyond Comprehension. When a bodhisattva dwells in this emancipation, he can take something as tall and broad as Mount Sumeru and put it inside a mustard seed without enlarging one or shrinking the other, and Mount Sumeru, king of mountains, will still have its original shape. Moreover, the Four Heavenly Kings and the gods of the Trayastrimsha heaven [who live on Mount Sumeru] will not even know or realize where they have gone to. Only those destined for enlightenment will be able to see that Sumeru has been put inside a mustard seed. This is called dwelling in the doctrine of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension.

"Or again, this bodhisattva can take the waters of the four great oceans and pour them into the opening that holds a single hair, without the fish, turtles, sea turtles, lizards, or other sea creatures being in any way troubled, and those great seas will still have their original form. And the dragons, spirits, asuras, and others [who live in the sea] will not know or realize where they have gone to, and these beings will not be at all troubled.

"Or again, Shariputra, this bodhisattva who dwells in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension can slice off the thousand-millionfold world, grasp it in the palm of his right hand like a potter's wheel, and toss it beyond lands numerous as the sands of the Ganges, and the beings in that world will not know or realize where they have gotten to. The bodhisattva can then bring it back and put it in its original place, and none of the people will have any idea they have gone somewhere and come back, and the world will have the same shape as before.

"Again, Shariputra, suppose there are beings who want to live in this world for a long time but are qualified to enter enlightenment. This bodhisattva can stretch seven days into a kalpa, so that to those beings they really seem like a whole kalpa. Or if there are beings who do not want to live in this world for long and they are qualified to enter enlightenment, this bodhisattva can squeeze a kalpa into seven days, so that to those beings it seems like only seven days.

"Again, Shariputra, the bodhisattva who dwells in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension can take the magnificent adornments from all the Buddha lands, gather them together, and show them to the beings living in a single country Or this bodhisattva can place all the beings of a single Buddha land in the palm of his right hand and fly with them all around the ten directions, showing them everything, and yet never move from his original spot.

"Or, Shariputra, this bodhisattva can take all the objects offered to the Buddhas by the beings in the worlds in the ten directions and make them all visible within a pore that holds a single hair, or take all the suns, moon, stars, and constellations that belong to the worlds in the ten directions and make them visible within the pore of a single hair Or, Shariputra, he can suck into his mouth all the winds from the worlds in the ten directions without doing any harm to himself or breaking down the trees that grow there. Or, when the worlds in the ten directions come to the end of the kalpa and everything is destroyed by fire, he can take all those fires and hold them in his belly, and though the fires go on burning as before, the bodhisattva suffers no harm. Or he can go down into the lower region, past Buddha lands numerous as the sands of the Ganges, pick up one Buddha land, and lift it to the upper region, above Buddha lands numerous as the sands of the Ganges, as one would lift the leaf of a jujube tree on the point of a needle, and that land will be in no way troubled.

"Or, Shariputra, the bodhisattva who dwells in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension can use his transcendental powers to make himself appear in the body of a Buddha, or the body of a pratyekabuddha, or that of a voice-hearer, an Indra, a Brahma king, one of the Four Heavenly Kings, or a wheel-turning king. Or again he can take all the voices uttered by the beings in the worlds of the ten directions, high, middle, and low-grade sounds, and transform them all into the voice of the Buddha. He can make these voices discourse with the sounds of 'impermanence', 'suffering,' 'emptiness,' or 'non-ego,' or expound all the various other doctrines preached by the Buddhas of the ten directions, and cause those doctrines to be heard everywhere.

"Shariputra, I have just now briefly described the powers possessed by this bodhisattva of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension. If I were to describe them in full, I could go on for a whole kalpa and never have done."

At that time Mahakashyapa, hearing this discourse on the doctrine of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension, sighed at encountering what he had never heard before, and said to Shariputra, "It is like someone displaying various painted images before a blind man when he cannot see them. In the same way, when we voice-hearers hear this doctrine of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension, we are all incapable of understanding it. If wise persons hear it, there will be none who do not set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. But what of us, who are forever cut off at the root, who with regard to these Great Vehicle teachings have already become like rotten seed?2

2 The voice-hearers, who represent Hinayana Buddhism, because they have taken as their goal the attainment of the state of arhat, have in effect cut themselves off at the root from the search for the higher goal of Buddhahood, the goal of Great Uehicle or Mahayana Buddhist doctrine and practice. In Mahayana terms, the potential for Buddhahood inherent in the voice-hearers has become like rotten seed that will never sprout.

When voice-hearers hear this doctrine of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension, they will surely all cry out in anguish in voices loud enough to shake the whole thousand-millionfold world. But bodhisattvas should all accept this teaching with great joy and thanksgiving. For if there are bodhisattvas who put faith in this doctrine of the emancipation Beyond Comprehension, then none of the host of devils can do anything to them!"

When Mahakashyapa spoke these words, thirty-two thousand offspring of the gods set their minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi.

At that time Vimalakirti said to Mahakashyapa, "Sir, among those who play the part of devil kings in the immeasurable asamkhyas of worlds in the ten directions, there are many who in fact are bodhisattvas dwelling in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension. They employ their skill in expedient means to teach and convert living beings by appearing in the guise of devil kings.

"Or again, Kashyapa, with regard to the immeasurable numbers of bodhisattvas in the ten directions, sometimes people come to them begging for a hand or a foot, an ear, a nose, a head, an eye, marrow or brains, blood, flesh, skin, bones, or for their villages, towns, wives and children, men and women servants, elephants, horses, carriages, or for gold, lapis lazuli, seashell, agate, coral, amber, pearls, agate shell, clothing, food or drink. Many of those who beg in this fashion are bodhisattvas who dwell in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension. They employ their skill in expedient means and go to the other bodhisattvas to test them and make sure they are firm in their resolve [to give alms]. How can they do this? Because the bodhisattvas who dwell in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension possess powers of authority and virtue that enable them to importune others and make them perform difficult feats in this manner.3 Ordinary persons of inferior type have no such powers and hence cannot importune others as these bodhisattvas do. They are like donkeys who cannot stand up before the kicking and trampling of dragons or elephants.

"This is what is called the wisdom and expedient means possessed by the bodhisattvas who dwell in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension."

3 In speaking of people being importuned for an eye or some other part of the body, Vimalakirti probably has in mind the various tales in Buddhist lore of deities who take on devilish form and beg practitioners of the way for a piece of their body as a means of testing their dedication to the paramita of almsgiving. Vimalakirti is thus suggesting that the difficulties that Mahakashyapa and the other voice-hearers face may in fact just be a means of testing their resolve.

Chapter 7
REGARDING LIVING BEINGS
At that time Manjushri asked Vimalakirti, "How does the bodhisattva regard living beings?"

Vimalakirti replied, "As a conjurer looks on the beings he conjures up-thus does the bodhisattva regard living beings. As the wise view the moon in the water, or a face or form seen in a mirror; as shimmers of heat in a torrid season, as the echo that follows a cry, as clouds in the sky, as foam on the water, bubbles on the water, as a thing no firmer that the trunk of the plantain, no longer lasting than a flash of lightning; as a fifth great element, a sixth component, a seventh sense-media, a thirteenth sense-media, a nineteenth sense-realml-thus does the bodhisattva regard living beings.

"As forms in the world of formlessness, as sprouts from charred grain, as mistaken views of the body in one who has entered the stream that leads to the state of arhat, as a reentering of the womb by one no longer subject to rebirth, as the three poisons of greed, anger, and ignorance in ari arhat, as greed, anger, or violation of the precepts on the part of a bodhisattva who has accepted the birthless nature of all existence, as vestiges of earthly desire in a Buddha, as forms seen by a blind person, as the breathing in and out of one immersed in the samadhi of utter tranquility, as the tracks of a bird in the sky, as a child born to a barren woman, as, earthly desires in a phantom being, as sights in a dream after one has wakened, as the taking on of bodily form by one who has entered extinction, as fire that has no smoke-thus does the bodhisattva regard living beings."

1 That is, as one more of each category than actually exists.

Manjushri said, "If the bodhisattva looks on beings in this way, how can he treat them with compassion?"

Vimalakirti replied, "When the bodhisattva has finished regarding them in this way, he thinks to himself. 'For the sake of living beings I must preach this Law to them!' This is true compassion.

"He treats them with a compassion of tranquil extinction, for it results in no birth; treats them with a compassion unburning, for it is void of earthly desires; treats them with a compassion that is impartial, as the three existences of past, present, and future are impartial; treats them with a compassion free of contention, for nothing arises to oppose it; treats them with a compassion undualistic, for internal and external have no place in it; treats them with a compassion unfaltering, for it carries through to the end; treats them with a compassion firm and durable, for the mind of the bodhisattva never flags; treats them with a compassion clean and pure, as the nature of all phenomena is pure; treats them with a compassion boundless, boundless as the empty sky.

"He treats them with the compassion of the arhat, who has conquered the thieves of desire; treats them with the compassion of the bodhisattva, who brings contentment to all beings; treats them with the compassion of the Thus Come One, who has grasped the marks of Suchness; treats them with the compassion of the Buddha, who awakens living beings; treats them with a compassion wholly natural, understanding that it is causeless; treats them with a compassion of bodhi, which is of one flavor only; treats them with a compassion that has no gradation, for it cuts off all favoritism; treats them with great pity and compassion, guiding them with the Great Vehicle.

"He treats them with a compassion that never despairs, seeing that all is empty and without ego; treats them with the compassion of bestowal of the Law, never stinting in its gifts; treats them with the compassion of observance of the precepts, training those who break them to do better; treats them with the compassion of forbearance, guarding both others and self; treats them with the compassion of assiduousness, shouldering all beings as its burden; treats them with the compassion of meditation, unaffected by taste; treats them with the compassion of wisdom, which always knows the right time; treats them with the compassion of expedient means, with manifestations suited to every occasion.

"He treats them with a compassion that hides nothing, proceeding with the purity of an upright mind; treats them with the compassion of a deeply searching mind, one free of irrelevant motion; treats them with a compassion that is unerring, innocent of falsity and sham; treats them with a compassion full of peace and delight, for through it they gain the delight of the Buddha. Such is the compassion of the bodhisattva."

Continuing his questioning, Manjushri asked, "What do you mean when you speak of pity?"

"I mean that whatever benefits the bodhisattva gains, he shares them all with all other living beings," replied Vimalakirti. Manjushri: "What do you mean by joy?"

Vimalakirti: "Any way the bodhisattva can aid or enrich others he views as an occasion for joy and never for regret." Manjushri: "What do you mean by indifference?" Vimalakirti: "Whatever blessings or good fortune the bodhisattva bestows, he expects nothing in return."2

Manjushri then asked, "If the bodhisattva fears the cycle of birth and death, what should he rely on?"

Vimalakirti replied, "The bodhisattva, fearing the cycle of birth and death, should rely on the power of the Tathagata's blessings." Manjushri: "If he hopes to rely on the power of the Tathagata's blessings, what course should he pursue?"

2 Compassion, pity, joy, and indif ference constitute the four immeasurable qualities. See glossary.

Vimalakirti: "If he hopes to rely on the power of the Tathagata's blessings, he should devote himself to saving and liberating all living beings."

Manjushri: "If he hopes to save living beings, what must he free them from?"

Vimalakirti: "If he hopes to save living beings, he must free them from earthly desires."

Manjushri: "If he hopes to free them from earthly desires, how should he proceed?"

Vimalakirti: "He should proceed by the method of correct mindfulness."

Manjushri: "How does one proceed by the method of correct mindfulness?"

Vimalakirti: "One proceeds on the premise of no birth and no extinction."

Manjushri: "What has no birth, and what has no extinction?" Vimalakirti: "The not good has no birth, the good has no extinction."

Manjushri: "What is the root of good and not good?" Vimalakirti: "The body is the root."

Manjushri: "What is the root of the body?" Vimalakirti: "Desire and greed are the root." Manjushri: "What is the root of desire and greed?" Vimalakirti: "False and empty distinctions are the root." Manjushri: "What is the root of false and empty distinctions?" Vimalakirti: "Topsy-turvy thinking is the root."

Manjushri: "What is the root of topsy-turvy thinking?" Vimalakirti: "Groundless assumptions are the root of topsy-turvy thinking."

Manjushri: "What is the root of groundless assumptions?" Vimalakirti: "What is groundless can have no root. Manjushri, it is on the root of this groundlessness that all the other concepts are built up."

At that time there was a heavenly being, a goddess, in Vimalakirti's room who, seeing these great men and hearing them expound the Law, proceeded to make herself visible and, taking heavenly flowers, scattered them over the bodhisattvas and major disciples. When the flowers touched the bodhisattvas, they all fell to the floor at once, but when they touched the major disciples, they stuck to them and did not fall off. The disciples all tried to shake off the flowers through their supernatural powers, but they could not do so.

At that time the goddess said to Shariputra, "Why try to brush off the flowers?"

"Such flowers are not in accordance with the Law," he replied. "That's why I try to brush them off."3

The goddess said, "Don't say these flowers are not in accordance with the Law. Why? Because the flowers make no such distinctions. You in your thinking have made up these distinctions, that's all. If one who has left the household life to follow the Buddha's Law makes such distinctions, that is not in accordance with the Law. One must be without distinctions to be in accordance with the Law Look at the bodhisattvas-the flowers do not stick to them because they have already cut off all thought of distinctions. Just as evil spirits are able to take advantage of a person who is beset by fear, so because you disciples are fearful of the cycle of birth and death, the senses of form, sound, smell, taste, and touch are able to take advantage of you. But once a person has done away with fear, then the five desires that arise from these senses will not be able to get at him. So long as one has not done away with all such entanglements, the flowers will stick to him. But they will not stick to someone who has eliminated them all."

Shariputra said, "Goddess, have you been staying in this room long?"

She replied, "Venerable sir, my stay in this room is about as long as your attainment of emancipation."

3 The wearing of flowers or other personal ornaments was forbidden to members of the Buddhist order.

Shariputra said, "So you've been here a long time?" "Venerable sir," said the goddess, "how long has your attainment of emancipation been?"

Shariputra was silent and did not answer.

The goddess said, "With your great wisdom, venerable sir, why do you remain silent?"

Shariputra replied, "Emancipation cannot be spoken of in words. Therefore I do not know what I can say to you."

The goddess said, "Words, writing, all are marks of emancipation. Why? Because emancipation is not internal, not external, and not in between. And words likewise are not internal, not external, and not in between. Therefore, Shariputra, you can speak of emancipation without putting words aside. Why? Because all things that exist are marks of emancipation."

Shariputra said, "Doesn't emancipation mean putting aside lewdness, anger, and stupidity?"

The goddess said, "The Buddha, addressing persons of over-bearing arrogance, asserted that one must put aside lewdness, anger, and stupidity in order to gain emancipation, that is all. If he was addressing those who were free of overbearing arrogance, the Buddha asserted that the nature of lewdness, anger, and stupidity is emancipation itself."

Shariputra said, "Excellent, excellent! Goddess, what have you seized on, what have you seen into, that you speak with such eloquence?"

The goddess replied, "I have seized on nothing, seen into nothing, and hence speak with eloquence. Why? If one claims to have seized on something or seen into something, then in the light of the Buddha's Law one is being overbearingly arrogant."

Shariputra asked the goddess, "Of the three vehicles, which do you pursue?"

The goddess replied, "I use the Law of the voice-hearer to convert living beings, and therefore I practice the way of the voice-hearer. I use the Law of causes and conditions to convert living beings, and therefore I practice the way of the pratyekabuddha. I use the Law of great pity to convert living beings, and therefore I practice the Great Vehicle.

"Shariputra, when one enters a grove of champak trees, one smells only the odor of the champak and does not smell any other odor. And in the same way, when one enters this room, one smells only the fragrance of the Buddha blessings but takes no delight in smelling the fragrance of the voice-hearer's or the pratyekabuddha's blessings

"Shariputra, these Brahmas, Indras, Four Heavenly Kings, heavenly beings, dragons, spirits, and others who have entered this room and listen to this great man expound the correct Law all delight in the fragrance of the Buddha blessings and leave with their minds set on attaining them.

"Shariputra, I have been staying in this room for twelve years and never from the first have I heard any expounding of the Law of the voice-hearer or the pratyekabuddha. I have heard only of the great compassion and great pity of the bodhisattva, the Law of the Buddha that is beyond comprehension.

"Shariputra, this room constantly manifests eight rare and unprecedented phenomena. What are these eight? This room is constantly flooded with rays of golden light that never change, day or night. It is not lit by the shining of the sun or moon. This is the first rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"Those who enter this room are never troubled by defilements. This is the second rare and unprecedented phenomenon. "In this room Brahmas, Indras, Four Heavenly Kings, and bodhisattvas from other regions constantly come together in a gathering that never ends. This is the third rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"In this room there is constant exposition of the six paramitas and the unregressing wheel of the Law. This is the fourth rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"In this room heavenly beings constantly make superlative music, and from their strings come forth the sounds of immeasurable Dharma persuasions. This is the fifth rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"In this room are four great storehouses stacked high with varied treasures to relieve the destitute and rescue those in want, a supply to be drawn on yet never exhausted. This is the sixth rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"When this great man turns his thoughts to them, Shakyamuni Buddha, Amita Buddha, Akshobhya Buddha, Jeweled Virtue, jeweled Flame, Jeweled Moon, Jeweled Majesty, Hard to Surpass, Lion Echo, Profiting All, and countless other such Buddhas from the ten directions come at once to this room and broadly expound the secret and essential teachings, the store-house of the Dharma. And when they have finished expounding, they return to where they came from. This is the seventh rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"Within this room the magnificently adorned palaces of all the heavenly beings and the pure lands of the various Buddhas are all to be seen. This is the eighth rare and unprecedented phenomenon.

"These are the eight rare and unprecedented phenomena. Shariputra, who, seeing these sights beyond belief, would still delight in the Law of the voice-hearer?"

Shariputra said, "Why don't you change out of this female body?"4

The goddess replied, "For the past twelve years I have been trying to take on female form, but in the end with no success. What is there to change? If a sorcerer were to conjure up a phantom woman and then someone asked her why she didn't change out of her female body, would that be any kind of reasonable question?"

"No," said Shariputra. "Phantoms have no fixed form, so what would there be to change?"

4 Shariputra assumes that any woman would naturally want to change into a man if she had the power to do so.

The goddess said, "All things are just the same-they have no fixed form. So why ask why I don't change out of my female form?"

At that time the goddess employed her supernatural powers to change Shariputra into a goddess like herself, while she took on Shariputra's form. Then she asked, "Why don't you change out of this female body?"

Shariputra, now in the form of a goddess, replied, "I don't know why I have suddenly changed and taken on a female body! " The goddess said, "Shariputra, if you can change out of this female body, then all women can change likewise. Shariputra, who is not a woman, appears in a woman's body. And the same is true of all women-though they appear in women's bodies, they are not women. Therefore the Buddha teaches that all phenomena are neither male nor female."

Then the goddess withdrew her supernatural powers, and Shariputra returned to his original form. The goddess said to Shariputra, "Where now is the form and shape of your female body?"

Shariputra said, "The form and shape of my female body does not exist, yet does not not exist."

The goddess said, "All things are just like that-they do not exist, yet do not not exist. And that they do not exist, yet do not not exist, is exactly what the Buddha teaches."

Shariputra said to the goddess, "When your present existence comes to an end, where will you be reborn?"

The goddess replied, "The way the Buddha is born in his transformation body-that's how I'll be born."5

Shariputra said, "When the Buddha is born in his transformation body, it is not a matter of birth or death.

5 The Buddha takes on a "transformation body" when he appears in one of the lower realms of existence in order to guide and instruct the beings there. See glossary, under "three bodies."

The goddess said, "It's that way with living beings too-they are without birth or death."

Shariputra said to the goddess, "How long will it be before you attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi?"

The goddess replied, "Shariputra, when you revert to the state of a common unenlightened mortal, then I will succeed in gaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi."

Shariputra said, "It is unthinkable that I should become a common mortal again!"

The goddess said, "It is likewise unthinkable that I should attain anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Why? Because bodhi is nothing to be thought about, hence nothing to be attained."

Shariputra said, "The Buddhas who are now attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, and those who have attained it in the past and will attain it in the future, numerous as the sands of the Ganges-what would you say of all those?"

The goddess said, "We use the numbers of everyday language, and so we speak of all those as belonging to the three existences of past, present, and future. But this is not to say that bodhi knows anything of past, present, and future." .

Then the goddess said, "Shariputra, have you attained the way of the arhat?"

Shariputra said, "I've realized there is nothing to be attained, so I've attained it."

The goddess said, "The Buddhas and bodhisattvas are that waý too. They've realized there is nothing to attain, and so they've attained it."

At this time Vimalakirti said to Shariputra, "This goddess has in the past made offerings to ninety-two million Buddhas and can disport herself with the supernatural powers of a bodhisattva. She has fulfilled all that she vowed, has accepted the truth of birthlessness, and dwells in a state from which she will never regress. Because of her original vow, she can show herself anytime she ;vishes and teach and convert living beings."

Chapter 8
THE BUDDHA WAY
At that time Manjushri asked Vimalakirti, "How does the bodhisattva go about mastering the Buddha way?"

Vimalakirti said, "The bodhisattva should follow a path that is not the way-then he can master the Buddha way." Manjushri asked, "How does the bodhisattva follow a path that is not the way?"

Vimalakirti replied, "If the bodhisattva goes to the region of the five sins that lead to the hell of incessant suffering, he shows no anguish or anger. He arrives in hell, but is free of offense or defilement. He arrives in the realm of beasts, but without the faults of stupidity or arrogance. He arrives in the realm of the hungry spirits, yet is fully endowed with merits. He goes to the world of form and the world of formlessness, but makes no boast of this.

"He shows greed and desire in his actions, yet is removed from the stains of attachment. He shows anger in his actions, yet has no anger or aversion toward living beings. He appears to be stupid, but utilizes wisdom to regulate his mind. He appears stingy and grasping, yet relinquishes both inner and outer possessions, begrudging neither body nor life. He appears to break the commandments, but in fact resides secure in the pure precepts, and even then remains fearful of committing the smallest fault.

"He seems angry and irascible, yet is at all times compassionate and forbearinga He seems indolent and lazy, yet works diligently to acquire merit. He seems disordered in thought, yet constantly practices meditation. He seems stupid, yet has mastered both worldly and otherworldly wisdom.

"He appears fawning and deceitful, but is skilled in expedient means and faithful to the sutra doctrines. He appears haughty and arrogant, yet serves as a bridge and a crossing for living beings. He appears to be immersed in earthly desires, but his mind is at all times clear and pure.

"We see him going among devils, yet he abides by the Buddha wisdom and heeds no other teachings. We see him going among voice-hearers, but to living beings he preaches a Law never heard before. We see him going among pratyekabuddhas, but he manifests great pity in teaching and converting living beings.

"He seems to be among the poor and destitute, yet he has jeweled hands capable of bestowing inexhaustible benefits. He seems to be crippled and deformed, yet possesses auspicious features, adorning himself wonderfully with them. He seems to be humble and lowly, yet is born into the seed and lineage of the Buddha, fully endowed with blessings. He seems to be among the puny and emaciated, the ugly and vile, yet acquires the body of a Narayana, a delight for all beings to see.l He seems to be old and ailing, yet has forever cut off the roots of illness and transcended the fear of death.

"He appears to possess wealth, but habitually regards it as transient and in fact covets none of it. He seems to have wives, concubines, and waiting women, yet never sullies himself in the bog of the five desires. He seems thick-tongued and clumsy in speech, yet commands great eloquence and retains all he has learned, forgetting nothing. Though appearing to employ unorthodox methods of salvation, he follows the correct teaching in saving living beings. He appears to enter all the different paths of existence, yet cuts himself off from their influence. He appears to have entered nirvana, yet never cuts himself off from the realm of birth and death.

1 Narayana, an incarnation of Vishnu, ís incorporated into Buddhism as a guardian deity noted for his heroic strength and stature.

"Manjushri, by going to places that are the opposite of the way in this fashion, the bodhisattva is able to master the Buddha way."

Vimalakirti than asked Manjushri, "What may act as the seeds of the Thus Come One?"2

2 That is, the seeds leading to enlightenment or Buddhahood.

Manjushri said, "The body is the seed, ignorance and partiality are the seeds, greed, anger, and stupidity are the seeds. The four topsy-turvy views are the seeds, the five obscurations are the seeds, the six sense-media are the seeds, the seven abodes of consciousness are the seeds, the eight errors are the seeds, the nine sources of anxiety are the seeds, the ten evil actions are the seeds. To sum it up, the sixty-two erroneous views and all the different kinds of earthly desires are all the seeds of the Buddha."

"What do you mean by that?"

Manjushri replied, "A person who has perceived the uncreated nature of reality and entered into correct understanding cannot again set his mind on attaining anuttara-samyaksam-bodhi. The lotus does not grow on the upland plain; the lotus grows in the mud and mire of a damp low-lying place. In the same way, the Buddha Law can never grow in a person who has perceived the uncreated nature of reality and entered into correct understanding. It is only when living beings are in the midst of the mire of earthly desires that they turn to the Buddha Law.

"If you plant seeds in the sky, they will never grow. Only when you plant them in well-manured soil can they sprout and flourish. In the same way, the Buddha Law will never grow in a person who has perceived the uncreated nature of reality and entered into correct understanding. But one who entertains ego-istic views as huge as Mount Sumeru can still set his mind on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. From this you should understand thataall the various earthly desires are the seeds of the Thus Come One. If you do not descend into the vast ocean, you can never acquire a priceless pearL In the same way, if you do not enter the great sea of earthly desires, you can never acquire the treasure of comprehensive wisdom." y''.: At that time Mahakashyapa sighed and said, "Excellent, excellent, Manjushri! These words are aptly spoken. It is indeed just as you say. Those who are troubled by the passions are the seeds of the Thus Come One. But persons such as us, [the voice- hearers], are now no longer capable of setting our minds on the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi. Even those who have committed the five sins that lead to the hell of incessant suffering can still rouse aspirations that will afford growth to the Buddha Law. But now we can never rouse such aspirations. We are like persons whose faculties are impaired and can no longer satisfy the five desires. The voice-hearers, who have cut off all entanglements, are like this, for they can no longer bene- fit from the Buddha Law, nor will they ever have the desire to. "In this sense, Manjushri, the common mortal responds with gratitude to the Buddha Law but the voice-hearer does not. Why do I say this? Because when the common mortal hears the Buddha Law, he can set his mind on attaining the unsurpassed way, determined that the Three Treasures shall never perish. But the voice-hearer may hear of the Buddha's Law and powers and fearlessness to the end of his life and yet never be capable of rousing in himself an aspiration for the unsurpassed way." At that time there was in the assembly a bodhisattva named Universally Manifested Physical Body who asked Vimalakirti, "Layman, your father and mother, wife and children, relatives, retainers, clerks, people, and friends-who are they? Your maids and men servants, your elephants, horses, and carriages-where are they?"

Vimalakirti replied with the following verses:

Wisdom is the bodhisattva's mother,
expedient means his father;
of those who guide and teach all beings,
there are none not born of these.
Dharma joy is his wife,
pity and compassion of mind are his daughters,
the good mind and sincerity his sons,
final emptiness and tranquility his dwelling.
For disciples he has the many dusts and passions;
they follow the dictates of his will.
The thirty-seven elements of the Way are his good friends;
through them he gains correct enlightenment.
The paramitas are his Dharma companions,
the four methods of winning others, his singing girls.
For songs they carol the words of the Dharma;
such is the music made for him.
In the garden of full retention of the teachings
grow the trees of the Law free of outflows.
Their wonderful blossoms are the seven factors of enlightenment,
their fruit, emancipation and wisdom.
On the bathing-pool of the eight emancipations,
brimming with clear waters of meditation,
spread the lotuses of the seven purities;
those who bathe there are spotless.
His elephants and horses race the five roads of transcendental power,
for chariot he has the Great Vehicle.
Controlling, directing with the single mind,
he travels the eightfold path.
His form displays all the auspicious marks,
every good feature adorns him.
He is clothed in the garments of shame and remorse,
a deeply searching mind his garland.
For wealth he has the treasure of the seven assets
which he teaches to others, enriching them.
He practices as the teachings direct,
his great profits he shares with others.
His couch is the four meditations,
where the pure way of life is born.
He hears much, augmenting his wisdom,
sounding the call of self-awakening.
The sweet dew of the Law is his food,
sauced with the flavor of emancipation.
He bathes in purification of the mind,
anointing himself with the perfume of the precepts.
He wipes out the thieves of earthly desire;
his valor cannot be outshone.
He conquers and subdues the four kinds of devils,
his victory banners fly over the place of practice.
Though he knows there is no arising or extinction,
he undergoes birth so he may instruct others.
In every land he manifests himself;
like the sun, nowhere is he not seen.
To the countless millions of Thus Come Ones of the ten directions he gives alms,
yet he never thinks of these Buddhas as in any way separate from himself.
Though he knows that the Buddha lands,
along with living beings, are empty,
yet constantly he works to purify the lands,
teaching and converting the many beings.
The form and voice and behavior of every manner of living being -
the bodhisattva with his fearless powers can take on any of these in an instant.
He understands all devilish affairs and can imitate the actions of devils.
Wise in the skillful use of expedient means, he can manifest all such forms at will.
At times he shows himself old, sick, dying, in order to wake living beings,
so they will realize they are like conjured phantoms and gain understanding free of all obstacles.
Sometimes he shows the kalpa ending in flames,
heaven and earth consumed with all else,
so that people who think of things as permanent
will clearly perceive their impermanence.
Countless billions of living beings
come in company to visit the bodhisattva,
all arriving at his house at the same moment;
he converts them, directs them to the Buddha way.
Secular writings, secret spells and incantations,
crafts, skills, the many arts -
all these he shows himself adept in,
so he may aid and benefit living beings.
He becomes a monk in all the different creeds of the world
so that thereby he may free others from delusion
and save them from falling into erroneous beliefs.
At times he becomes the sun, the moon, a heavenly being,
an Indra, a Brahma, lord of the world;
at others he may become earth or water, or again become wind or fire.
If during the kalpa there is pestilence,
he manifests himself as medicinal herbs;
those who drink potions made from them will be healed of sickness, cleansed of all poison.
If during the kalpa there is famine,
he manifests his body as food and drink,
first relieving hunger and thirst,
then telling people of the Law.
If during the kalpa there is a clash of arms,
he accordingly rouses a mind of compassion,
converting those living beings,
causing them to dwell in a land without contention.
When great armies confront each other in the field,
he causes them to be of equal might,
manifesting his bodhisattva power and authority,
subduing them and restoring peace.
In whatever country hells exist,
at once he sets out, journeys there,
striving to relieve their sufferings.
In whatever country beasts are devouring one another,
in all his births he manifests himself there so he can bring aid to those lands.
He shows himself subject to the five desires yet is also seen to practice meditation,
causing the devils' minds to be dazed and confounded
so they cannot take advantage of others.
To live as a lotus among flames-this may be deemed a rare thing.
To exist amid desire yet practice meditation-this too is rare!
Sometimes he shows himself as a woman of
pleasure, enticing those prone to lechery.
First he catches them with the hook of desire,
then leads them into the Buddha way
Sometimes he appears as a village headman,
other times as leader of the merchants,
as a teacher of the nation, a high-placed official, abetting and profiting all beings.
Where there are those in poverty and want he shows himself with limitless stores,
using them to encourage and lead others, causing them to set their minds on attaining bodhi.
Among those arrogant and full of ego
he becomes a man of great strength,
overpowering and curbing their haughtiness,
causing them to dwell in the unsurpassed way.
Where there are those timid and quailing
he stands at their head to lend assurance.
First he fills them with fearlessness,
then causes them to set their minds on the way.
Sometimes he is seen renouncing lust and desire
to become a holy man of the five transcendental powers,
opening the way, guiding living beings,
causing them to dwell in the precepts, forbearance and compassion.
If there are those looking for servants,
he shows himself as a groom or menial,
and after delighting his employers,
he rouses in them a mind for the way.
Whatever others are looking for,
he supplies it to win them to the Buddha way
With his skill in the power of expedient means he can satisfy all their waits.
Thus his ways are beyond measure,
his practices know no bounds; infinite in wisdom,
he saves and emancipates countless beings.
Though all the Buddhas for numberless billions of kalpas should praise the merits he achieves,
they could never finish doing so.
Who can hear of this Law and not set his mind on the attainment of bodhi?
Who but the utterly worthless, the blindly ignorant, the witless?
Chapter 9
ENTERING TIIE GATE OF NONDUALISM
At that time Vimalakirti said to the various bodhisattvas, "Sirs, how does the bodhisattva go about entering the gate of nondualism? Let each one explain as he understands it."

One of the bodhisattvas in the assembly, whose name was Dharma Freedom, spoke these words: "Sirs, birth and extinction form a dualism. But since all dharmas are not born to begin with, they must now be without extinction. By grasping and learning to accept this truth of birthlessness, one may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Virtue Guardian said, "'I' and 'mine' form a dualism. Because there is an 'I', there is also a 'mine.' But if there is no 'I,' there will be no 'mine.' In this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Unblinking said, "Perception and nonperception form a dualism. But if dharmas are not perceived, then there is nothing to take hold of. And because there is nothing to take hold of, there will be no grasping, no rejecting, no action, no volition. In this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Virtue Peak said, "Defilement and purity form a dualism. But if one sees into the true nature of defilement, it is without the marks of purity but leads into the extinction of all marks. In this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Good Constellation said, "The stirring of the mind and thought-these two form a dualism. But if the mind is not stirred, then there will be. no thought. And if there is no thought, there will be no discrimination. The one who has thoroughly mastered this may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Good Eye said, "The unique in form and the formless constitute a dualism. But if one understands that the unique in form is in fact the formless, and then does not seize on the formless but sees all as equal, one may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Wonderful Arm said, "The bodhisattva mind and the voice-hearer mind constitute a dualism. But if one regards the mind as empty in form, like a conjured phantom, then there is no bodhisattva mind and no voice-hearer mind. In this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Pushyal said, "Good and not good form a dualism. But if one does not call up either good or not good but enters into the realm of the formless and truly masters it, in this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Lion said, "Blame and blessing form a dualism. But if one penetrates the true nature of blame, it is no different from blessing. When one can dispose of forms with this diamondlike wisdom, neither bound nor liberated, one may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Lion Will said, "Presence of outflows of passion and absence of such outflows constitute a dualism. But if one can grasp the fact that all dharmas are equal, then one will not give rise to the concept of outflows or no outflows. One will not be attached to form nor dwell in formlessness either. In this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Pure Understanding said, "The created and the uncreated form a dualism. But if one does away with all enumerations, then the mind is like empty sky, freed of all obstacles through pure clean wisdom. In this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

1 Pushya (Pusya) is the twenty-third of the twenty-eight constellations or stellar mansions of Indian astrology, the constellation under whose influence this bodhisattva was born.

The bodhisattva Narayana said, "The worldly and the unworldly form a dualism. But since the nature of the worldly is empty, the worldly is in fact the unworldly Neither entering into it nor going out of it, neither exceeding nor falling short-in this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Good Will said, "The realm of birth and death and that of nirvana form a dualism. But if one sees the true nature of birth and death, one sees that there is no birth or death, no binding, no unbinding, no birth,2 no extinction. One who understands in this way may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Direct Seeing said, "The exhaustible and the inexhaustible form a dualism. But whether dharmas are in the end exhaustible or inexhaustible, they are all without the marks of exhaustibility. And if they are without the marks of exhaustibility, they are empty And if they are empty, they are without the marks either of exhaustibility or inexhaustibility. If one enters this realm of understanding, one my thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Universal Guardian said, "'I' and 'not-I' form a dualism. But when one cannot grasp even 'I,' how can one grasp 'not-I'? One who has seen into the true nature of 'I' will no longer give rise to these two concepts, and in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Lightning God said, "Enlightenment and ignorance form a dualism. But the true nature of ignorance is none other than enlightenment. And enlightenment cannot be seized, but is apart from all enumerations. One dwells in the center, in the equality without dualism, and in this way enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Joyful Seeing said, "Form and the emptiness of form constitute a dualism. But form is none other than emptiness; emptiness does not represent the extinction of form. Form is itself empty by nature. In the same way perception, conception, volition, and consciousness, and the emptiness of consciousness, constitute dualisms. But consciousness is none other than emptiness; emptiness does not represent the extinction of consciousness. Consciousness is itself empty by nature.3 Dwelling in the midst of these concepts and understanding them thoroughly, one may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

2 In place of sheng, "birth," some texts read jan, "burning;" that is, no burning of the fire of passion, no putting out of the fire.

The bodhisattva Enlightened as to Form said, "To regard the four elements [earth, water, fire, and wind] as different from the element emptiness or space is dualistic. The nature of the four elements is none other than the nature of emptiness. Just as the past and future of these elements is empty, so too must their present be empty. If one can understand the nature of the elements in this way, one may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Wonderful Will said, "The eye and the objects it observes constitute a dualism. But if one understands the nature of the eye, then with regard to objects one will be without greed, without anger, and without stupidity. This is called tranquil extinction. Similarly, the ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the body and touch, and the mind and phenomena constitute dualisms. But if one understands the nature of the mind, then with regard to phenomena one will be without greed, without anger, and without stupidity. This is called tranquil extinction. Dwelling at rest in its midst, one may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

3 The text spells out the argument in full only in the case of the first and last terms in the series, form and consciousness, but the same argument applies to the other terms, perception, conception, and volition. This same type of abbreviated construction is used in the next answer and in several of those that follow.

The bodhisattva Inexhaustible Will said, "Almsgiving, and applying the merits gained thereby to acquire comprehensive wisdom, constitute a dualism. But the nature of almsgiving is none other than the applying of merits to acquire comprehensive wisdom. Similarly, keeping of the precepts, forbearance, assiduousness, meditation, and wisdom form dualisms in contrast to the applying of merit to acquire comprehensive wisdom, etc. But the nature of wisdom is none other than the applying of merits to acquire comprehensive wisdom. By entering into an understanding of the singleness of form that all these share, one may thus enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Deep Wisdom said, "This is emptiness, this is formlessness, this is nonaction-to speak in this manner is dualistic. Emptiness is none other than formlessness, formlessness is none other than nonaction. If something is empty, formless, nonacting, then it is without mind, will, or consciousness. This single doctrine of emancipation is the same as the threefold doctrine of emancipation [regarding emptiness, formlessness, and nonaction]. In this way one enters the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Tranquil Roots said, "To speak of the Buddha, the Law, and the assembly is dualistic. The Buddha is none other than the Law, the Law is none other than the assembly. These Three Treasures are all uncreated in form, like the empty sky, and all dharmas are the same. One who can act in accordance with this understanding may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Mind Unobstructed said, "The body and the body extinguished constitute a dualism. But the body is none other than the body extinguished. Why? Because one who sees into the true form of the body does not give rise to thoughts of seeing the body or seeing the extinction of the body The body and the extinction of the body are not two things, not a distinction to be made. One who rests in this understanding, neither alarmed nor fearful, may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Superior Goodness said, "To speak of the activities of body, mouth, and mind is dualistic. These three activities are all marked by the aspect of nonaction. If the body is marked by nonaction, then the mouth must be marked by nonaction, and if the mouth is marked by nonaction, then the mind must be marked by nonaction. And since these three activities are marked by nonaction, then all dharmas must be marked by nonaction. One who can go along with this wisdom of non-action may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Merit Field said, "To speak of meritorious deeds, blameful deeds, and deeds that call forth no retribution is dualistic. The true nature of all three kinds of deeds is empty. And if it is empty, then there are no meritorious deeds, no blameful deeds, and no deeds that call forth no retribution. One who does not rouse any thought of distinctions with regard to these three types of deeds may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Flower Garland said, "From the concept of 'self' rises the concept of two things, [self and other,] which creates a dualism. But one who sees into the true form of the self will not give rise to the thought of two things. And if one does not dwell in the thought of two things, then one will be without consciousness and without anything one is conscious of, and in this way may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Virtue Storehouse said, "To suppose that there is some form or object that one can acquire is dualistie. But if one realizes that there is nothing to be acquired, then there will be no grasping and no rejecting. And when there is no grasping and no rejecting, one may in this way enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Moon in Midair said, "Darkness and light form a dualism; if there is no darkness and no light, there will be no dualism. Why? It is like entering the meditation that wipes out perception and conception, where there is neither darkness nor light. And the forms of all dharmas are the same as this. If one enters this state and views all with equality, one may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Treasure Sign said, "To yearn for nirvana and not delight in the world constitutes a dualism. But if one does not yearn for nirvana and does not loathe the world, there will be no dualism. Why? If there is binding, there will be un-binding. But if there is no binding to begin with, who will seek to be unbound? And where there is no binding and unbinding, there will be no yearning and no loathing, and in this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Jewel Crowned King said, "The correct way and the erroneous way constitute a dualism. But one who dwells in the correct way does not make distinctions, saying 'This is erroneous!' or 'This is correct!' By removing oneself from both, one may thereby enter the gate of nondualism."

The bodhisattva Delight in Truth said, "The true and the not true form a dualism. But one who sees truly cannot even see the true, so how can he see the untrue? Why? Because they cannot be seen by the physical eye; only the eye of wisdom can see them. But for this eye of wisdom there is no seeing and no not seeing. In this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

When the various bodhisattvas had finished one by one giving their explanations, they asked Manjushri, "How then does the bodhisattva enter the gate of nondualism?"

Manjushri replied, "To my way of thinking, all dharmas are without words, without explanations, without purport, without cognition, removed from all questions and answers. In this way one may enter the gate of nondualism."

Then Manjushri said to Vimalakirti, "Each of us has given an explanation. Now, sir, it is your turn to speak. How does the bodhisattva enter the gate of nondualism?"

At that time Vimalakirti remained silent and did not speak a word.

Manjushri sighed and said, "Excellent, excellent! Not a word, not a syllable-this truly is to enter the gate of nondualism!"

When this chapter on Entering the Gate of Nondualism was preached, five thousand bodhisattvas in the assembly were all able to enter the gate of nondualism and to learn to accept the truth of birthlessness.

Chapter 10
FRAGRANCE ACCUMULATED
At that time Shariputra thought to himself, "It is almost noon. What are all these bodhisattvas going to eat?"

Then Vimalakirti, knowing what was in his mind, said, "The Buddha preached the eight emancipations. You, sir, should undertake to practice them. Why be distracted by thoughts of eating when you are listening to the Law? If you want some-thing to eat, wait a moment. I will see that you get the sort of food you have never had before!"

Vimalakirti then entered samadhi and, employing his transcendental powers, showed the great assembly a country called Many Fragrances, situated in a region high above, beyond Buddha lands as numerous as the sands of forty-two Ganges. The Buddha named Fragrance Accumulated was at that time present there. The fragrance of his country was finer than the fragrance of all the human and heavenly realms of the Buddha lands of the ten directions. In his land there was not even the term voice-hearer or pratyekabuddha, but only great bodhisattvas, pure and clean, for whom the Buddha preached the Law. All the inhabitants of his world built their halls and towers out of fragrances, strolled the fragrant ground; and had gardens all made of fragrances. The fragrant aroma of their food wafted to immeasurable worlds in the ten directions. At this time the Buddha and the various bodhisattvas were just sitting down together to eat. Heavenly offspring, all named Fragrant Garland, all with their minds set on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, were serving the meal to the Buddha and the bodhisattvas.

Among the great assembly [gathered at Vimalakirti's house,] there were none who could not see these things with their own eyes.

Then Vimalakirti addressed the bodhisattvas, saying, "Sirs, who among you can bring us some of that Buddhá s food?" Out of deference to Manjushri's authority and supernatural powers, however, all of them remained silent.

[Addressing Manjushri,] Vimalakirti said, "Sir, a great assembly such as this-this is shameful, is it not?"

Manjushri replied, "As the Buddha has told us, never despise those who have yet to learn."

Thereupon Vimalakirti, without rising from his seat but in the presence of the whole gathering, conjured up a phantom bodhisattva whose auspicious features, shining brightness, authority and virtue were so superior that they outshone the entire group. Then he announced to this bodhisattva, "You must go to the region high above, beyond Buddha lands numerous as the sands of forty-two Ganges, where there is a country called Many Fragrances. The Buddha, named Fragrance Accumulated, is just now sitting down with his bodhisattvas to a meal. When you arrive in his presence, speak as I instruct you, saying, 'Vimalakirti bows his head before the feet of the World-Honored One with immeasurable reverence and begs to inquire if in your daily activities your illnesses are few, your worries are few Does your strength suffice you? He desires to obtain the leftovers from this meal of the World-Honored One so he may carry out the Buddha's work by dispensing them in the saha world, enabling those who delight in a lesser doctrine to be broadened by the great way, and also to cause the Thus Come One's fame to be heard on all sides.'"

At that time this conjured bodhisattva in the presence of the gathering ascended to the region high above. Everyone in the entire assembly could see him as he departed, and as he arrived in the world called Many Fragrances and made his obeisance at the feet of the Buddha there. And they could hear him say, 'Vimalakirti bows his head before the feet of the World-Honored One with immeasurable reverence and begs to inquire if in your daily activities your illnesses are few, your worries are few. Does your strength suffice you? He desires to obtain the leftovers from this meal of the World-Honored One so he may carry out the Buddha's work by dispensing them in the saha world, ensuring that those who delight in a lesser doctrine will be broadened by the great way, and also that the Thus Come One's fame may be heard on all sides."

When the great men [of the country Many Fragrances] saw this conjured bodhisattva, they sighed at seeing what they had never seen before, and said, "Where has this superior being come from? The saha world-where is that? What is this thing he calls a'lesser doctrine?'"1

When they had put these questions to their Buddha, the Buddha announced to them, "In the lower region, beyond Buddha lands as numerous as the sands of forty-two Ganges, there is a world called saha. The Buddha named Shakyamuni is at present manifesting himself in that evil world of the five impurities in order to expound the teachings of the Way to living beings who delight in a lesser doctrine. He has a bodhisattva named Vimalakirti who dwells in the emancipation Beyond Comprehension and preaches the Law for the other bodhisattvas. He has purposely dispatched this phantom being to come and extol my name and praise this land, so that thereby he may bring increased benefits to those bodhisattvas."

The bodhisattvas said, "How can this man conjure up a phantom such as this? Does he possess such strength of virtue, such fearlessness, such transcendental powers?"

1 The inhabitants of the country Many Fragrances, as we have been told earlier, have never even heard of voice-hearers or pratyekabuddhas.

The Buddha replied, "His powers are great indeed! He dispatches phantoms in all the ten directions to carry out the Buddha's work and bring enrichment to living beings."

Then the Thus Come One Fragrance Accumulated took a bowl of many fragrances, filled it with fragrant rice, and gave it to the phantom bodhisattva.

At that time the nine million bodhisattvas all spoke out in unison, saying, "We wish to visit that saha world and offer alms to Shakyamuni Buddha. And we also wish to see Vimalakirti and the many other bodhisattvas."

"You may go," said the Buddha. "But draw in your bodily fragrances so that you will not cause living beings to be deluded or beguiled by them. And you should put aside your real form so that the persons in that country who are striving to become bodhisattvas will not feel intimidated or ashamed. And you must not look on that land with disdain or contempt or rouse thoughts that obstruct progress. Why? Because all the lands in the ten directions are as empty as the sky. It is just that, since the Buddhas wish to convert those who delight in a lesser doctrine, they do not reveal the full purity of the land."

At that time the phantom bodhisattva, having received the bowl of rice, joined the nine million bodhisattvas and all, relying upon the might and supernatural power of the Buddha and upon Vimalakirti's power, suddenly vanished from that world and then in the space of an instant arrived at Vimalakirti's house.

Vimalakirti immediately conjured up nine million lion seats, beautifully adorned like the ones that were already there, and the bodhisattvas all sat down in them.

The bodhisattva then presented the bowl filled with fragrant rice to Vimalakirti. The fragrance of the rice perfumed the entire city of Vaishali and the whole thousand-millionfold world. The Brahmans, lay believers, and others of Vaishali, smelling this fragrant aroma, were delighted in body and mind, sighing with admiration at something they had never known before.

At that time Moon Canopy, a leader among the rich men, accompanied by eighty-four thousand persons, came to Vimalakirti's house. Seeing the vast number of bodhisattvas gathered in the room and the lion seats, tall, broad, and beautifully adorned, they were aII filled with delight. After paying obeisance to the bodhisattvas and the major disciples, they retired and stood to one side. Various earth deities, sky deities, and heavenly beings of the world of desire and the world of form, smelling the fragrant aroma, all likewise came to Vimalakirti's house.

Then Vimalakirti said to Shariputra and the other great voice-hearers, "Sirs, come eat this rice from the Thus Come One, delicious as sweet dew It is redolent with the odor of great pity. But you must not eat it in a narrow-minded manner, or you will never digest it!"

Some of the other voice-hearers thought to themselves, "There is only a little rice-how can it feed all the people in this great assembly?"

But the phantom bodhisattva said, "Do not try to use your voice-hearers' petty virtue and petty wisdom in appraising the immeasurable blessings and wisdom of the Thus Come One! Though the four seas run dry, this rice will never come to an end. Every person here could eat helpings the size of Mount Sumeru, and do so for a whole kalpa, but still it would never be exhausted. Why? Because this is the Ieftovers from a meal eaten by persons who have acquired inexhaustible merits through the precepts, meditation, wisdom, emancipation, and the insight of emancipation. Therefore it can never be exhausted."

The rice in the bowl was then used to feed to satisfaction all the members of the assembly, yet it remained as it was, with-out any sign of depletion. The bodhisattvas, voice-hearers, and heavenly and human beings who ate the rice had a sense of bodily ease and delight of mind, Iike the bodhisattvas in the Country of All Delights and Adornments. And a wonderful fragrance emanated from the pores of all of them, like the fragrance of the trees in the Iand called Many Fragrances.

At that time Vimalakirti asked the bodhisattvas from the country Many Fragrances, "How does the Thus Come One Fragrance Accumulated preach the Law?"

The bodhisattvas replied, "The Thus Come One in our land does not employ words in his exposition. He just uses various fragrances to induce heavenly and human beings to undertake the observance of the precepts. Each bodhisattva sits under a fragrant tree, and when he smells the marvelous fragrance, he immediately attains the samadhi known as the Storehouse of All Virtues. Persons who are able to attain this samadhi all become endowed with the blessings of a bodhisattva."

The bodhisattvas then asked Vimalakirti, "Now how does the World-Honored One Shakyamuni preach the Law?" Vimalakirti replied, "The living beings of this land are stubborn and strong-willed and hard to convert. Therefore the Buddha uses strong language when preaching to them in order to tame and control them. He says, 'This is hell, this is the realm of beasts, this is the realm of hungry spirits, these are the difficult conditions, this is the place where stupid people are born. These are misdeeds of the body, these are the retribution for misdeeds of the body. These are misdeeds of the mouth, these are the retribution for misdeeds of the mouth. These are misdeeds of the mind, these are the retribution for misdeeds of the mind.

"'This is the killing of living beings, this is the retribution for killing living beings. This is taking what has not been given to you, this is the retribution for taking what has not been given to you. This is sexual misconduct, this is the retribution for sexual misconduct. This is lying, this is the retribution for lying. This is being double-tongued, this is the retribution for being double-tongued. This is harsh speech, this is the retribution for harsh speech. This is specious talk, this is the retribution for specious talk. This is greed, this is the retribution for greed. This is wrath, this is the retribution for wrath.

"'These are erroneous views, this is the retribution for erroneous views. This is stinginess, this is the retribution for stinginess. This is breaking the precepts, this is the retribution for breaking the precepts. This is anger, this is the retribution for anger. This is sloth, this is the retribution for sloth. This is distractedness, this is the retribution for distractedness. This is stupidity, this is the retribution for stupidity.

"'This is accepting the precepts, this is keeping the precepts, this is violating the precepts. This is what ought to be done, this is what ought not to be done. This is creating obstacles, this is not creating obstacles. This is incurring blame, this is avoiding blame. This is purity, this is defilement. This is to have outflows, this is to be free of outflows. This is the wrong way, this is the correct way. This is the conditioned, this is the unconditioned. This is the mundane world, this is nirvana.'

"These people who are difficult to convert have minds like monkeys. Therefore one must resort to various methods in order to control and regulate their minds. Only then can they be tamed and made obedient. It is like dealing with an elephant or horse that is wild and unruly One must apply sharp blows, till it feels them in its bones, and then it can be tamed. And it is the same with these stubborn and strong-willed beings who are difficult to convert. Therefore one uses all sorts of bitter and piercing words, and then they can be made to observe the precepts."

When those bodhisattvas had finished listening to this explanation, they all exclaimed, "We have never heard of such a thing before! A World-Honored One like Shakyamuni who conceals his immeasurable powers of freedom and preaches the Law in a manner that will please the mean in spirit in order to save and liberate all beings! And these bodhisattvas-how zealous of them, in their immeasurably great pity, to condescend to be born in this Buddha land!"

Vimalakirti said, "The bodhisattvas of this land are indeed steadfast in their great pity for all living beings. It is just as you have said. And the enrichment and benefit they bring to living beings in one lifetime here is greater than that bestowed in other worlds over the space of a hundred thousand kalpas. Why? Because in this saha world there are ten good practices that do not exist in any of those pure lands.

"What are these ten? Almsgiving, which does away with poverty and destitution. Pure precepts, which do away with violation of the prohibitions. Forbearance, which does away with anger. Assiduousness, which does away with sloth. Meditation, which does away with distractedness of mind. Wisdom, which does away with stupidity. The explanation of how to remove oneself from difficulties, which saves those who face the eight difficulties. The doctrine of the Great Vehicle, which saves those who delight in the Lesser Vehicle. The cultivation of good roots, which rescues those who are lacking in virtue. And the four ways of winning people, which are constantly employed to guide living beings to success. These are the ten."

The bodhisattvas said, "What methods must these bodhisattvas carry out in their practices in this saha world so that they may be born free of boils and sores in a pure land?"2

Vimalakirti replied, "These bodhisattvas must carry out eight methods in their practices in this world in order to be born free of boils and sores in a pure land. What are these eight? They must enrich and benefit living beings but look for no recompense. They must take upon themselves the sufferings of all living beings, and what merit they acquire thereby shall all be a gift to those beings. In mind they must be like other living beings, humbling themselves, descending to their level, erecting no barriers. They shall regard other bodhisattvas as though they were looking at the Buddha himself. When they hear a sutra they have not heard before, they shall not doubt it, and they shall not dispute with or oppose the voice-hearers. They shall not envy the alms received by others, nor boast of their own gains. In carrying out these methods, they must regulate and control their minds, constantly reflecting on their own faults and not censuring the shortcomings of others. At all times they shall with a single mind strive to acquire merits. These are the eight methods."

2 That is, free of physical ills or defects. Such ills would indicate that the bodhisattva's religious practice had been faulty.

When Vimalakirti and Manjushri expounded these teachings to the great assembly, a hundred thousand heavenly and human beings all set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyaksam-bodhi, and ten thousand bodhisattvas were able to accept the truth of birthlessness.

Chapter 11
ACTIONS OF THE BODHISATTVAS
At that time the Buddha was in the Amra Gardens preaching the Law when the ground suddenly became broad and beautifully adorned, and all the persons assembled there took on a golden color.

Ananda said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, what is the reason for this auspicious sign? The area has become suddenly broadened and adorned, and the members of the assembly have all taken on a golden color!"

The Buddha said to Ananda, "Vimalakirti and Manjushri, reverently surrounded by a great gathering of persons, have decided to come here. Therefore this auspicious sign has first of all appeared."

At that moment Vimalakirti said to Manjushri, "Let us go together to see the Buddha and join the bodhisattvas in paying obeisance and making offerings."

Manjushri said, "Excellent, we will go indeed. This is just the time to do so."

Vimalakirti, employing his supernatural powers, proceeded to pick up the whole great assembly, along with their lion seats, place them in the palm of his right hand, and journey with them to the place where the Buddha was. After arriving there and depositing them on the ground, he bowed his head at the feet of the Buddha, circled to the right, performing seven circumambulations of the Buddha and, pressing his palms together with a single mind, stood to one side. The bodhisattvas all immediately left their seats, bowed their heads at the Buddha's feet, performed seven circumambulations, and stood to one side. The major disciples, Brahmas, Indras, and Four Heavenly Kings all likewise left their seats, bowed their heads at the Buddha's feet, and stood to one side.

Then the Buddha, after making the customary greetings and inquiries, sent them back to their seats. After all of them, following his instructions, had settled again in their seats, the Buddha said to Shariputra, "Did you see what these bodhisattvas, these great men, did through their freely exercised supernatural powers?"

"Yes, I saw it."

"And what did you think of it?"

"World-Honored One, what I saw them do was incredible. My mind cannot comprehend it, it is beyond my fathoming!" At that time Ananda said to the Buddha, "World-Honored

One, this fragrance I smell is like nothing I have ever known. What fragrance is this?"

The Buddha replied to Ananda, "This is the fragrance that comes from the pores of these bodhisattvas."

Then Shariputra said to Ananda, "Our pores too put forth this fragrance!"

"Where does it come from?" asked Ananda.

"It comes from the rice left over from the Buddha's meal that the rich man Vimalakirti had brought from the country Many Fragrances," replied Shariputra. "The pores of everyone who ate it at his house emit this kind of fragrance."

Then Ananda asked Vimalakirti, "How long will this fragrant aroma last?"

Vimalakirti said, "Until the rice is digested."

"And how long will it be before the rice is digested?"

"The power of this rice is such that it will be seven days before it is digested. Moreover, Ananda, if voice-hearers who have not yet reached the stage of ultimate determination eat this rice, they will be able to digest it only after they reach that stage. And if persons who have already reached that stage eat this rice, they will be able to digest it only after they have gained liberation of mind. If those who have not yet set their minds on attaining the Great Vehicle eat this rice, they will have to set their minds on that before they can digest it. If those who have already set their minds on doing so eat this rice, they will have to accept the truth of birthlessness before they can digest it. If those who have already accepted the truth of birthlessness eat this rice, they will have to advance to the place where Buddhahood is assured them in their next birth before they can digest it. It is like the medicine called Superior Flavor that remains undigested until all the poisons in the body of the person who takes it have been eliminated. This rice is the sameonly after all the poisons of earthly desires have been wiped out will it be digested."

Ananda said to the Buddha, "I have never heard of such a thing, World-Honored One-to think that this fragrant rice can be used to do the Buddha's work!"

The Buddha said, "just so, just so, Ananda. And there are some Buddha lands where the radiant light of the Buddha is used to do the Buddha's work. Some where bodhisattvas are used to do the Buddha's work. Some where phantom beings conjured up by the Buddha are used for the Buddha's work. Some where the bodhi tree is used for the Buddha's work. Some where the Buddha's garments or bedding are used for the Buddha's work. Some where the Buddha's food is used for the Buddha's work. Some where gardens, groves, pavilions, and towers are used to do the Buddha's work. Some where the thirty-two features and eighty characteristics, auspicious marks that accompany the body of the Buddha, are used to do the Buddha's work. Some where the Buddha's body is used for the Buddha's work. And some where empty space is used for the Buddha's work. Living beings, responding to these various agents, are thereby led to undertake the practice of the precepts.

"There are lands where similes such as dreams, phantoms, reflections, echoes, images in a mirror, the moon in the water, or shimmering heat waves are used to do the Buddha's work. There are some where voices, spoken words, or written words are used to do the Buddha's work. Or pure Buddha lands where tranquil silence, without words, without explanations, without purport, without cognition, without action, without conditioning, does the Buddha's work. Thus, Ananda, among all daily activities of the Buddhas, their comings and goings, every act that they carry out, there is not one that does not do the Buddha's work.

"Ananda, there is a gate known as the four devils and the eighty-four thousand earthly desires. Living beings are wearied and belabored by these devils and desires, but the Buddhas use this as a method by which to do the Buddha's work. This is called the Dharma gate of entry to all Buddhas. Bodhisattvas who have entered this gate, when they see Buddha lands replete with all manner of purity and beauty, will not for that reason feel delight or longing or elation, and when they see Buddha lands with all sorts of impurities, they will not feel sad or vexed or downcast. They will merely regard the Buddhas with renewed purity of mind, experiencing a joy and reverence they have never known before. The merits of the various Buddhas, the Thus Come Ones, are all equal, but in order to convert living beings, they manifest themselves in different kinds of Buddha lands.

"Ananda, look at the various Buddha lands. The land in them is varied, but there is no variation in the sky. And it is the same when you look at the various Buddhas. Their physical bodies are varied, but that is all. There is no variation in their unimpeded wisdom. Ananda, a physical body, impressive features, lineage, precepts, meditation, wisdom, emancipations, the insight of emancipations, powers, fearlessnesses, properties not shared by others, great compassion, great pity, the observance of proper demeanor, as well as a fixed life span, the power to preach the Law, to teach and convert others, to lead living beings to enlightenment, to purify the Buddha lands, and to assimilate the Law of other Buddhas-all these are possessed equally by all the various Buddhas. Therefore they are called Samyak-sambuddha (Perfectly Enlightened Buddha), they are called Tathagata (Thus Come One), they are called Buddha (Enlightened One).

"Ananda, if I were to explain to you in detail the meaning of these three epithets, you could live for a whole kalpa and still not hear all I have to say. Even if all the living beings in the thousand-millionfold world were like you, Ananda, who are foremost in hearing the teachings and concentrating on and retaining all you have heard, and they were to live for a whole kalpa, they could not hear it all. So it is, Ananda-the anuttara-samyak-sambodhi of the Buddhas is beyond fathoming, and their wisdom and eloquence defy comprehension."

Ananda said to the Buddha, "From now on, I will never dare think of myself as a person who has 'heard many of the teachings.'"

The Buddha said to Ananda, "Don't be discouraged! Why? Because when I spoke of you as foremost among the voice-hearers in the volume of teachings you have heard, I was not speaking with the bodhisattvas in mind. So do not take the matter to heart, Ananda. No wise person should try to estimate the abilities of the bodhisattvas. All the deepest places in the sea can still be fathomed, but the meditation, wisdom, power to retain the teachings, eloquence, and all the various merits of the bodhisattvas are immeasurable. Ananda, you and the others had best forget about the actions of the bodhisattvas. This manifestation of supernatural power that Vimalakirti has just now shown us no voice-hearer or pratyekabuddha could equal in a hundred thousand kalpas, no matter how he might exhaust his powers of transformation!"

Then the bodhisattvas who had come from the world Many Fragrances pressed their palms together and addressed the Buddha, saying, "WorId-Honored One, when we first saw this land, we thought of it as base and inferior. But now we regret our error and have put such thoughts out of our minds. Why? Because the expedient means employed by the Buddhas are beyond comprehension. In order to save living beings, they manifest different kinds of Buddha lands, depending upon what is appropriate to the circumstances. Very well then, World-Honored One. We would like you to bestow a little of your teachings on us so that when we return to our own land we will have something to remember the Thus Come One by."

The Buddha announced to the bodhisattvas, "There is the doctrine of the exhaustible and the inexhaustible emancipation. You would do well to learn this. What does exhaustible mean? It means those things that are conditioned. What does inexhaustible mean? It means those things that are unconditioned. But beings such as the bodhisattvas do not exhaust [or have done with] the conditioned, nor do they dwell in the unconditioned.

"What is meant by not exhausting the conditioned? It means not setting aside great compassion, not renouncing great pity; giving profound expression to the mind of comprehensive wisdom and never forgetting it; teaching and converting living beings without ever wearying; being constantly mindful of the four methods of winning people and applying them in season; guarding and upholding the correct Law without thought for life or limb. It means to work tirelessly to plant the roots of goodness; to keep the will at all times fixed on expedient means and the transfer of merit to others; to seek the Law without ever slacking, to preach the Law without ever stinting. It means diligently making offerings to the Buddhas; purposely entering the realm of birth and death with no feelings of fear; facing all types of honor or disgrace without thought of sadness or joy; not looking with contempt on those who have yet to learn and respecting the learned as though they were the Buddha himself. It means arousing correct thoughts in those sunk in earthly desires, but without unduly prizing the desire to remove oneself from passion. One should not cling to one's own desires, but applaud the desires of others.

"It means looking on meditational states as though they were a form of hell, but on the realm of birth and death as though contemplating a garden; viewing those who come seeking instruction with thoughts of how one may be a good teacher; setting aside one's own possessions and thinking how to acquire comprehensive wisdom; seeing those who violate the precepts and rousing thoughts of how to save them.

"It means thinking of the paramitas as one's father and mother; thinking of the elements of the Way as one's retinue of followers; working ceaselessly to nourish the roots of goodness; using the adornments of other pure lands to complete a Buddha land of one's own; practicing unbounded charity and thereby acquiring auspicious physical characteristics; putting aside all evil and purifying body, mouth, and mind; dwelling in the realm of birth and death for countless kalpas, ever valiant in mind; listening to the immeasurable virtues of the Buddha, one's determination never flagging; using the sword of wisdom to cut down the thieves of earthly desires; going beyond the realm of components, elements, and sense-media, shouldering the burden of living beings and bringing them to unending emancipation; employing great assiduousness in driving back and vanquishing the armies of the devil; constantly seeking to practice the wisdom that is without discriminative thought, the true aspect of reality; with regard to worldly things, lessening desires, knowing what is enough; with regard to unworldly things, tirelessly seeking them, and yet not rejecting the things of the world.

"It means never breaking the rules of proper demeanor, yet being able to accommQdate to worldly ways; calling up transcendental powers and wisdom and using them to guide living beings; acquiring concentration and retention of memory so that one never forgets what one has heard; being able to distinguish the different capacities of people correctly and freeing them from doubt; expounding the Law with a pleasing and appropriate eloquence that flows unimpeded; scrupulously carrying out the ten good actions and receiving the blessings of human and heavenly beings; cultivating the four immeasurable qualities of mind and opening up the Brahma way; earnestly requesting to hear the preaching of the Law and receiving it with joy and commendation; acquiring the voice of the Buddha and the excellence of his body, mouth, and mind; acquiring his proper demeanor, practicing his good Law with profound diligence, ever more accomplished in action; using the Great Vehicle teachings to create a community of bodhisattvas; never self-indulgent in mind, never missing an opportunity for acts of goodness-one who practices these methods may be called a bodhisattva who does not exhaust the conditioned.

"What is meant by saying that the bodhisattva does not dwell in the unconditioned? It means that one studies and practices the teachings on emptiness, but does not take emptiness to be enlightenment. One studies and practices the teachings on nonform and nonaction, but does not take nonform and nonaction to be enlightenment. One studies and practices the teachings on nonarousal [of causes], but does not take nonarousal to be enlightenment. One views things as impermanent, but does not neglect to cultivate the roots of goodness. One views the world as marked by suffering, but does not hate to be born and die in it. One sees that there is no permanent ego, but is tireless in instructing others. One sees that there is such a thing as tranquil extinction, but does not dwell in extinction for long. One views the world as something to be cast off, withdrawn from, yet with body and mind one practices goodness. One sees there is no destination, yet one makes the good Law one's destination. One sees there is no birth, yet one takes on the form of birth in order to share the burdens of others. One sees that outflows [of passion] should be cut off, yet one does not cut them off. One sees that there is nothing to be practiced, yet one practices the Law in order to teach and convert living beings. One embraces the view of emptiness and nothingness, yet does not discard one's great pity. One embraces the view that the correct Law [nirvana] can be attained, yet one does not follow Lesser Vehicle doctrines in this matter. One embraces the view that all phenomena are void and false, lacking firmness, lacking personality, lacking a master, lacking form, yet while one's original vow remains unfulfilled, one does not regard merits, virtues, meditation, or wisdom as meaningless. When one practices these methods, one may be called a bodhisattva who does not dwell in the unconditioned."

At that time those bodhisattvas, having heard the explanation of this teaching, were all filled with great delight. Selecting from among the many wonderful flowers those of various colors and various fragrances, they scattered them throughout the whole thousand-millionfold world. And then, having made their offering to the Buddha and to these sutra teachings, as well as to the other bodhisattvas, they bowed their heads in obeisance at the Buddha's feet and sighed at having heard what they had never heard before, exclaiming, "Shakyamuni Buddha knows how to employ expedient means in a truly skillful manner!"

Having spoken these words, they suddenly vanished from sight and returned to their own country.

Chapter 12
SEEING AKSHOBHYA BUDDHA
At that time the World-Honored One said to Vimalakirti, "You wanted to see the Thus Come One. Now how do you regard the Thus Come One?"

Vimalakirti said, "As I would regard my own true form or reality-in that same way do I regard the Thus Come One. I regard the Thus Come One as not existing from past times, not departing in the future, not abiding here at present.

"I do not regard him as form, I do not regard him as resembling form, I do not regard him as having the nature of form. I do not regard him as perception, conception, volition, or consciousness. I do not regard him as resembling consciousness. I do not regard him as having the nature of consciousness.l

"He does not rise out of the four great elements but is the same as the empty sky. He is without accumulation of the six sense-media, he has transcended eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, and does not exist in the threefold world. He has separated himself from the three defilements [of greed, anger, and stupidity], passed through the three gates to emancipation, and acquired the three understandings, which are the equivalent of ignorance.

"He is not identical in form with others, not different in form, not of his own form, not of some other form, not lacking form, not acquiring form. He is not on this shore, not on the other shore, not in midstream, and yet he converts living beings.

1 Vimalakirti spells out the full process of negation only for the first and last of the five components, form and consciousness, but it is assumed that the same negations apply to the other three, perception, conception, and volition.

He is seen to be in tranquil extinction, but does not remain in extinction for long. He is not this, he is not that, he does not show himself in this, he does not show himself in that. One can-not know him through wisdom, one cannot be conscious of him through consciousness. He is without darkness, without brightness, without name, without form, without strength, without weakness. He is not pure, not defiled, not in any direction, not removed from direction, not conditioned, not unconditioned, without purport, without explanation. He is not charitable, not stingy, does not observe the precepts, does not violate them, is not forbearing, not irate, does not press forward, does not slack, is not calm in mind, is not distracted, is not wise, is not stupid, is not sincere, is not deceitful, does nct arrive, does not depart, does not go out, does not enter in. He is cut off from all that can be said in words.

"He is not a field that produces merit, not a field that does not produce merit, he is not worthy of alms, he is not unworthy of alms. He is not to be acquired, not to be put aside, does not possess form, is not without form. He is identical with the ultimate reality, one with the Dharma-nature.

"He cannot be labeled, cannot be measured, for he is beyond all labeling and measuring. He is not big, not little, not to be seen, not to be heard, not to be awakened to, not to be known. He is removed from all ties and bonds, equal to all wisdoms, identical with living beings, free of distinctions with regard to things. He is utterly without loss, without contamination, with-out anxiety, without action, without rousing, without birth, without extinction, without fear, without sorrow, without joy, without weariness, without attachment, without a past existence, without a future existence, without a present existence. No words or explanations whatsoever can distinguish and depict him.

"World-Honored One, the body of the Thus Come One is like this and this is the way I regard him. To regard in this manner is called correct regarding. To regard in any other is called erroneous regarding."

At that time Shariputra asked Vimalakirti, "Where did you die before you were reborn here?"

Vimalakirti said, "In the Law that you learned, is there any such thing as dying or being born?"

Shariputra replied, "No, there is no dying or being born." "If all things are without the nature of dying or being born, then why do you ask where I died before I was reborn here? What is your opinion? Do phantom men and women conjured up by a magician know anything of dying or being born?"

"No, there is no dying or being born for them."

"And have you not heard the Buddha say that all things are in the nature of conjured beings?"

"Yes," replied Shariputra.

"If all things are in the nature of conjured beings, then why do you ask where I died before I was reborn here? Shariputra, dyíng is in its nature simply the destruction of something that is empty and fraudulent, and being born is in its nature the continuation of something that is empty and fraudulent. But the bodhisattva, though he dies, does not wipe out his good roots, and though he is born, he does not prolong those things that are evil."

At that time the Buddha said to Shariputra, "There is a country called Wonderful Joy with a Buddha named Immovable (Akshobhya). Vimalakirti here died in that country and was reborn in this one."

Shariputra said, "I have never heard of such a thing, World-Honored One! That this man could bring himself to abandon a land of purity and willingly come to this place with all its wrath and injury!"

Vimalakirti said to Shariputra, "What is your opinion? When the light of the sun shines forth, does it mix with the darkness?" "No," replied Shariputra. "When the light of the sun shines forth, all darkness at once ceases to exist."

Vimalakirti said, "And the sun-why does it visit this continent of Jambudvipa?"

"Because it wishes to use its brightness to drive the darkness away" replied Shariputra.

Vimalakirti said, "The bodhisattva is like this. Though he is born in an impure Buddha land, he does this so he can convert living beings. He does not mix with or share its stupidity and darkness. He merely wipes out the darkness of earthly desires that besets living beings."

At that time the members of the great assembly were filled with longing, desiring to see the Wonderful Joy world and the Thus Come One Immovable and his host of bodhisattvas and voice-hearers. The Buddha knew what all the members of the assembly were thinking, and he said to Vimalakirti, "Good man, you must make the land Wonderful Joy and the Thus Come One Immovable and his host of bodhisattvas and voice-hearers visible to the members of this assembly. They all long to see them!"

Then Vimalakirti thought to himself, "Now, without rising from my seat, I shall take this country Wonderful Joy, with its Iron Encircling Mountains and rivers, its valleys, waterways, great seas, fountains, its Sumeru and the other mountains, along with its sun, moon, stars, the palaces of the heavenly beings, dragons, spirits, Brahmas and Indras, as well as its host of bodhisattvas and voice-hearers, its cities, villages, men and women, old and young, along with the Thus Come One Immovable and the bodhi trees and wonderful lotus blossoms that are able to carry out the Buddha's work in the ten directions, the jeweled straircases that extend from the continent of Jambudvipa all the way up to the Trayastrimsha heaven, the jeweled stairways by which the heavenly beings may descend and all pay reverence to the Thus Come One Immovable and listen to and receive his sutra teachings, and the inhabitants of Jambudvipa may also ascend these stairways to the Trayastrimsha heaven and visit its heavenly beings, for the world Wonderful Joy is replete with immeasurable merits such as these, extending upward to the Akanishtha heaven and downward to its watery base-and all this I shall lift from its place and take in my right hand, as though removing it from a potter's wheel, and bring it here to this world, like some flower garland I am holding, and show it to all these beings!"

Having had this thought, he entered samadhi and, manifesting his transcendental powers, lifted the Wonderful Joy world out of its place with his right hand and set it down on the ground [in this world].

The host of bodhisattvas and voice-hearers and the various heavenly and human beings in that world who had acquired transcendental knowledge all cried out together, saying, "Look, World-Honored One! Someone is making off with us! Save and protect us, we beg of you!" But the Buddha Immovable said, "This is not my doing. This is the work of Vimalakirti's super-natural powers." And the rest of the beings in that world who had not yet acquired transcendental knowledge did not even realize or know where they had gotten to. But although the Wonderful Joy world had been placed on the ground in this world, it had not increased or decreased in size, and this world likewise had in no way become cramped or narrow, but was no different from what it had always been.

Then Shakyamuni Buddha addressed his great assembly, saying, "Do you see the Wonderful Joy world, the Thus Come One Immovable, and the splendid adornments of his land, the purity of the practices carried out by his bodhisattvas, the impeccable cleanness of his major disciples?"

All replied, "Yes, we have seen them."

The Buddha said, "If bodhisattvas wish to acquire a Buddha land as pure and spotless as this, they should study the way practiced by the Thus Come One Immovable."

When this Wonderful Joy country appeared in the saha world, fourteen nayutas of persons set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, all desiring to be born in the Buddha land Wonderful Joy. Shakyamuni thereupon gave them a prophecy, saying, "You will be born in that land."

Then the Wonderful Joy world, having finished bestowing enrichment and benefit upon this country, returned to its original place. All the members of the assembly saw it do so.

The Buddha addressed Shariputra, saying, "Did you see this Wonderful Joy world and the Buddha Immovable?"

"Yes, I saw them, World-Honored One. And I beg you to enable all living beings to acquire a clean and pure land like that of the Buddha Immovable, and to gain transcendental powers like those of Vimalakirti.

"World-Honored One, I and the others have happily acquired excellent benefits, being able to see this person and to approach and make offerings to him. And other living beings, either now while the Buddha is here or after he has passed away, if they hear this sutra, will acquire excellent benefits as well. And how much more so if, having heard it, they believe and understand it, accept and uphold it, read and recite it, expound it to others, and practice it as the Law directs. One who holds this sutra in hand has thereby acquired the storehouse of the jewels of the Law. If one reads and recites it, understands and expounds it, and practices it as the Law directs, the Buddhas will guard and keep in mind that person. And if there are those who give alms to such a person, let it be known that this is giving alms to the Buddha. If there are those who copy and preserve these sutra scrolls, let it be known that the Thus Come One will visit their rooms. And if there are those who, hearing this sutra, can respond with appropriate joy, those persons will forthwith acquire comprehensive wisdom. If there are those who believe and understand this sutra, even just one four line verse of it, and can expound it to others, let it be known that such persons will forthwith receive a prophecy of the attainment of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi."

Chapter 13
THE OFFERING OF THE LAW
At that time Shakra Devanam (Indra) spoke up from the great assembly, addressing the Buddha in these words, "World-Honored One, though I have heard hundreds and thousands of sutras from the Buddha and Manjushri, I have never heard one with such astounding freedom of action, transcendental powers, and unfailing grasp of the true reality. According to my understanding of what the Buddha has just said, if there are living beings who hear this sutra on the Law, believe and understand it, accept and uphold it, read and recite it, then they will surely and without doubt acquire that Law And how much more so if they practice it as the Law directs. Such persons will shut off all evil paths of existence and open the gates to all good ones. They will be constantly guarded and kept in mind by the Buddhas, will refute the non-Buddhist teachings, overcome the devil and his animosity, cultivate and practice bodhi, and rest secure in the place of practice, following in the way trod by the Thus Come One.

"World-Honored One, if there are persons who accept and uphold, read and recite this sutra and practice it as the Law directs, then I and my followers will offer alms to them and serve them. And if there is a place among the villages or towns, the mountain forests or the broad plain where this sutra exists; then I and my followers will go there together to listen to and accept the Law; and those who do not yet believe in it I will lead to belief, and to those who already believe I will be a guardian."

The Buddha said, "Excellent, excellent, heavenly lord! It is just as you have said. And I will assist you in your joyful task. This sutra expounds in comprehensive manner the anuttara-samyak-sambodhi of the Buddhas of the past, future, and present, which is beyond comprehension. Therefore, heavenly lord, if good men and good women accept, uphold, read, recite, and make offerings to this sutra, they are making offering to the Buddhas of past, future, and present.

"Heavenly lord, suppose this thousand-millionfold world were as full of Thus Come Ones as it is of sugarcane, bamboo, reeds, rice and hemp plants, or forest trees. If there were good men or good women who for the space of a kalpa, or less than a kalpa, were to revere and honor, praise and make offerings to them and provide for their well-being; and if after those Buddhas had passed away, these persons built towers adorned with the seven treasures to house the relics from each Buddha body, towers so broad they covered the four continents and so high they reached to the Brahma heaven, their central pole richly decorated; and if these persons made offerings of all kinds of flowers, incense, necklaces, flags, pennants, and music, all of the most refined and wonderful kind, and did this for the space of a kalpa, or less than a kalpa-heavenly lord, what is your opinion? Would these persons have thereby planted the seeds of many blessings?"

Shakra Devanam replied, "Of many blessings indeed, World-Honored One! If I were to spend a hundred thousand million kalpas, I could never finish describing all their blessings and merits."

The Buddha said to the heavenly lord, "You should understand that if there are good men and good women who, on hearing this sutra on the emancipation Beyond Comprehension, believe, understand, accept, uphold, read, recite, and practice it, their blessings will be even greater than those of such persons. Why? Because the bodhi of the Buddhas is all born from this sutra. The marks of bodhi are beyond limit or measure, and for that reason their blessings are immeasurable."

The Buddha then said to the heavenly lord, "A countless asamkhya number of kalpas in the past, there appeared in the world a Buddha named Medicine King, Thus Come One, worthy of offerings, of right and universal knowledge, perfect clarity and conduct, well gone, understanding the world, unexcelled worthy, trainer of people, teacher of heavenly and human beings, Buddha, World-Honored One.l His world was called Great Adornment and his kalpa was called Adornment. This Buddha had a life span of twenty small kalpas. His voice-hearer monks numbered thirty-six million nayutas and his bodhisattva monks twelve million.

"Heavenly lord, at that time there was a wheel-turning sage king named Jeweled Parasol who possessed all the seven treasures and ruled over the four continents of the world. This king had a thousand sons, upright, valiant, capable of overpowering their enemies. At that time Jeweled Parasol came with his followers to make offerings to the Thus Come One Medicine King, providing him with all he needed for his well-being. He did this for five whole kalpas, and when the five kalpas were over, he said to his sons, 'You too should make offerings to the Buddha with the same deeply searching mind as I have shown.' The thousand sons, obeying their father's command, proceeded to make offerings to the Thus Come One Medicine King for another five full kalpas, providing him with everything needed for his wellbeing.

"One of the king's sons named Moon Parasol sat all alone, thinking to himself, 'Isn't there some offering that is better than these?'

"Then, through the Buddha's supernatural power, a heavenly being appeared in the sky and said, 'Good man, the offering of the Law is the finest of all offerings!'

"The son asked, 'What is the offering of the Law?'

"The heavenly being replied, 'You should go and ask the Thus Come One Medicine King. He will explain to you in detail the offering of the Law'

1 The phrases following the name of the Buddha constitute the conventional ten epithets or honorable titles for a Buddha.

"At once the prince Moon Parasol went to call on the Thus Come One Medicine King. After bowing his head in obeisance at the Buddha's feet, he retired to one side and addressed the Buddha, saying, 'World-Honored One, among all offerings, the offering of the Law is the finest. But what is the offering of the Law?'

"The Buddha said, 'Good man, the offering of the Law means the profound sutras preached by the Buddhas. The people of this world all find them hard to believe and hard to accept, for they are wonderfully subtle and hard to make out, clean and pure and without stain. They cannot be grasped through the making of distinctions or through thought. They are contained in the storehouse of the bodhisattva and are sealed with the dharani seal,2 and where this seal is affixed, one reaches the level of no regression. They bring about observance of the six paramitas, the skillful discrimination of meanings, and compliance with the teachings of bodhi, and through the finest of all sutras one enters the realm of great pity and compassion. The sutras put an end to all devilish affairs and all erroneous views, conform to the teaching on causality and those on no ego, no individual, no living beings, no life span, emptiness, no form, no action, and no arousing. They enable living beings to sit in the place of practice and to turn the wheel of the Law

"'Heavenly beings, dragons, spirits, gandharvas, and the others join in praising them. They can enable living beings to enter the storehouse of the Buddha Law; they embrace the comprehensive wisdom of the worthies and sages and expound the way practiced by the bodhisattvas. Relying on the principle of the true nature of all phenomena, they clearly set forth the doctrines of impermanence; suffering, emptiness, no ego, and tranquil extinction. They can save all living beings who violate the prohibitions, and in all dévils, non-Buddhist believers, and those given to greed and attachment they can inspiré fear. Buddhas, worthies, and sages join in extolling them. They turn away from the sufferings of birth and death and show instead the joy of nirvana. They are preached by the Buddhas of the ten directions and the three existences of past, present, and future.

2 The seal of memory that insures full retention of the teachings.

"'If one hears sutras such as these, believes, understands, accepts, upholds, reads, and recites them, and by employing the power of expedient means makes distinctions and expounds them for the sake of living beings, rendering their meaning perfectly clear, one is thereby guarding and protecting the Law, and this is called the offering of the Law.

"'Again, the sutras enable one to practice the teachings as the Law directs, to accord with the twelve-linked chain of causation, to set aside erroneous views and accept the truth of birthlessness, to realize once and for all that there is no ego, no existence of living beings, no deviating from or disputing with the law of cause and effect, thus removing all thought of personal possession.

"'They teach one to rely on meaning, not on words; to rely on wisdom, not on consciousness; to rely on sutras that are complete in meaning, not on those that are incomplete in meaning; to rely on the Law, not on the person; to go along with the true form of things, realizing that there is no entering in and no destination. They teach that, since ignorance in the end does not exist, so too action in the end does not exist, and so on through the other links in the twelve-linked chain of causation down to the fact that, since birth in the end does not exist, so too old age and death in the end do not exist. And when one learns to see in this manner, the twelve-linked chain of causation will cease to have any form that comes to an end, and one will no longer entertain the view that it does. This is called the finest of all offerings of the Law'"

The Buddha [Shakyamuni] then said to the heavenly lord, "When Prince Moon Parasol heard Medicine King Buddha expound the Law in this manner, he acquired a compliant tolerance of the truth of birthlessness. At once he took off his jeweled robes and the ornaments that adorned his body and offered them to the Buddha, saying, 'World-Honored One, after the Thus Come One has passed into extinction, I will carry out offerings of the Law and guard the correct Law. I beg you, through your might and supernatural powers, to take pity on me and strengthen me so that I can conquer the devil and his enmity and practice the bodhisattva way'

"The Buddha knew the thoughts that were in his deeply searching mind and bestowed on him a prophecy, saying, 'In that latter age you will guard and protect the citadel of the Law.'

"Heavenly lord, at that time Prince Moon Parasol, observing the purity of the Law and hearing this prophecy bestowed by the Buddha, was moved by faith to leave the household life and take up the practice of the good Law. He had not devoted him-self to diligent practice for long when he was able to acquire the five transcendental powers, carry out the bodhisattva way, and gain dharani power and unflagging eloquence. After the Buddha had passed into extinction, he exercised the transcendental powers he had acquired, the power to retain all he had heard, and the eloquence for fully ten small kalpas, continuing to turn the wheel of the Law turned by the Thus Come One Medicine King and spreading the teachings abroad. This monk Moon Parasol, by guarding and protecting the Law and putting forth diligent effort, was able in the space of his lifetime to convert hundreds, thousands, millions of persons, insuring that they would never regress in their pursuit of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi; to cause fourteen nayutas of others to develop a profound aspiration for the way of the voice-hearer or the pratyekabuddha; and to enable countless living beings to be born in the heavenly realm.

"Heavenly lord, the person who was king Jeweled Parasol at the time I have been speaking of-what do you think? He has now become a Buddha named Jewel Flame Thus Come One. And the king's one thousand sons will become the thousand Buddhas who will appear in our present age, the Worthy Kalpa.3 Krakucchanda was the first to attain Buddhahood, and the last will be the Thus Come One named Ruchi. The monk Moon Parasol is none other than myself.

"Thus, heavenly lord, you should understand this important point. The offering of the Law is the finest of all offerings. It is first in rank and without equal. Therefore, heavenly lord, you should use this offering of the Law as your offering to the Buddha."

3 Various sutras predict that a thousand Buddhas will appear in our present kalpa or eon, which is accordingly termed the Worthy Kalpa. Shakyamuni is the fourth to appear, and Maitreya will be the fifth.

Chapter 14
ENTRUSTMENT
Then the Buddha addressed the bodhisattva Maitreya, saying, "Maitreya, I now take this Law of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi, gathered over countless millions of asamkhya kalpas, and entrust it to you. In the latter age after the Buddha has passed into extinction, you must employ your supernatural powers to propagate sutras such as this, spreading them throughout the continent of Jambudvipa and never allowing them to be wiped out. Why? Because in the ages to come there will be good men and good women, as well as heavenly beings, dragons, spirits, gandharvas, rakshasas, and others, who will set their minds on attaining anuttara-samyak-sambodhi and will delight in the great Law If they are unable to hear sutras such as this, they will lose the opportunity to gain excellent benefits. But if beings such as these hear these sutras, they will surely believe and delight greatly in them and set their minds on a rare achievement. Therefore you must respectfully accept these and, considering how living beings can best gain benefits from them, expound them far and wide.

"Maitreya, you should understand that there are two types of bodhisattvas. What are these two types? The first type loves varied phrases and literary embellishment. The second is not afraid of deeper principles and is able to enter into the true meaning. If there are those who love varied phrases and literary embellishments, you máy be sure that they are beginners in the bodhisattva way. But if there are those who, approaching these extremely profound sutras, with their teachings on nondefilement and nonattachment, are not timid or fearful but can enter into the meaning and, having heard the sutras, with pure minds will accept, uphold, read, and recite them and practice them as the Law directs, you may be sure that they have been practicing the way for a long time.

"Again, Maitreya, there are two attitudes among those called beginners that prevent them from getting a firm grasp on these extremely profound teachings. What are these two? First is that of persons who, when they hear some profound sutra they have not heard before, are alarmed and timorous and, giving way to doubt, cannot bring themselves to comply with it. In their disbelief they speak slanderously of it, saying, 'I have never heard this before! Where does it come from?' Second is that of persons who, though there are those who guard, uphold, understand, and expound profound sutras of this type, are unwilling to associate closely with them, to offer them alms or treat them with respect, but at times may even speak of their faults before others. Where you find these two attitudes, you may be sure the persons are beginners in the bodhisattva way. They do injury to themselves and cannot train their minds to accept the profound teachings.

"Again, Maitreya, there are two attitudes among the bodhisattvas who, though they believe and understand the profound teachings, yet do injury to themselves and are unable to accept the truth of birthlessness. What are these two? First is that of persons who are contemptuous of beginner bodhisattvas and will not teach or enlighten them. Second is that of persons who, though they understand the profound teachings, seize upon surface appearances and make distinctions. These are the two attitudes."

The bodhisattva Maitreya, after listening to these words of exposition, addressed the Buddha, saying, "World-Honored One, this is something I have never heard before. It is as the Buddha has said. I must remove myself far off from evils such as these and strive to uphold this Law of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi that the Thus Come One has gathered over numberless asamkhya kalpas. If in the ages to come there are good men and good women who seek the Great Vehicle, I will see to it that sutras such as this come into their hands, will lend them powers of memorization, and will cause them to accept, uphold, read, and recite the sutras and expound them far and wide for others. World-Honored One, if in that latter age there are those who can accept, uphold, read, and recite them and expound them for others, you should know that all of them do so because I have inspired and strengthened them with my supernatural powers."

The Buddha said, "Excellent, excellent, Maitreya! It is as you have said. And the Buddha will assist you in your joyful task " ,

With this all the bodhisattvas, pressing their palms together, said to the Buddha, "After the Thus Come One has passed into extinction, we too will spread the Law of anuttara-samyak-sambodhi far and wide throughout the lands in the ten directions and will guide and assist those who expound the Law, seeing to it that they acquire this sutra."

Then the Four Heavenly Kings said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, in the towns and villages, the mountain forests and the broad plain, wherever there are those who possess this sutra, read and recite it, understand and expound it, we will take our ranks of officials and underlings and go to where they are so that we may hear the Law and will shelter and protect them, making certain that no one approaches within a hundred yojanas of them on any side to try to take unfair advantage of them"

Then the Buddha said to Ananda, "You must accept and up-hold this sutra and propagate it far and wide."

Ananda replied, "Indeed I will! I have already accepted and upheld its essentials, World-Honored One. But by what name should this sutra be called?"

The Buddha said, "Ananda, this sutra should be called The Expositions of Vimalakirti. And another name for it is The Doctrine of the Emancipation Beyond Comprehension. This is how you should accept and uphold it."

When the Buddha had finished expounding this sutra, the rich man Vimalakirti, Manjushri, Shariputra, Ananda, and the others, along with the heavenly and human beings, asuras, and all the other members of the great assembly were filled with joy at hearing the preaching of the Buddha, [and they believed and accepted it and respectfully put it into practice.]
Thus have I heard. 

At one time the Buddha was staying on the Vulture Peak in Rajagriha with a large company of twelve thousand monks. They were all great sages who had already attained supernatural powers. Among them were the following: the Venerable Ajnata-kaundinya, the Venerable Ashvajit, the Venerable Vaspa, the Venerable Mahanama, the Venerable Bhadrajit, the Venerable Vimala, the Venerable Yashodeva, the Venerable Subahu, the Venerable Purnaka, the Venerable Gavampati, the Venerable Uruvilva-kashyapa, the Venerable Gaya-kashyapa, the Venerable Nadi-kashyapa, the Venerable Mahakashyapa, the Venerable Shariputra, the Venerable Mahamaudgalyayana, the Venerable Kapphina, the Venerable Mahakausthilya, the Venerable Mahakatyayana, the Venerable Mahacunda, the Venerable Purna-maitrayaniputra, the Venerable Aniruddha, the Venerable Revata, the Venerable Kimpila, the Venerable Amogha-raja, the Venerable Parayanika, the Venerable Vakkula, the Venerable Nanda, the Venerable Svagata, the Venerable Rahula and the Venerable Ananda. All of these were Elders.

Mahayana bodhisattvas also accompanied the Buddha, including all those of this Auspicious Kalpa, such as the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, the Bodhisattva Manjushri and the Bodhisattva Maitreya. There were also the sixteen lay bodhisattvas, such as Bhadrapala, as well as the Bodhisattva Profound Thought, the Bodhisattva Wisdom of Faith, the Bodhisattva Voidness, the Bodhisattva Bloom of Supernatural Power, the Bodhisattva Hero of Light, the Bodhisattva Superior wisdom, the Bodhisattva Banner of Wisdom, the Bodhisattva Tranquil Ability, the Bodhisattva Wisdom of Vows, the Bodhisattva Sweet-smelling Elephant, the Bodhisattva Hero of Treasures, the Bodhisattva Dwelling-in-the-Center, the Bodhisattva Practice of Restraint and the Bodhisattva Emancipation.

Virtues of the Bodhisattva audience

[2] Each of these bodhisattvas, following the virtues of the Mahasattva Samantabhadra, is endowed with the immeasurable practices and vows of the Bodhisattva Path, and firmly dwells in all the meritorious deeds. He freely travels in all the ten quarters and employs skillful means of emancipation. He enters the treasury of the Dharma of the Buddhas, and reaches the Other Shore. Throughout the innumerable worlds he attains Enlightenment. First, dwelling in the Tusita Heaven, he proclaims the true Dharma. Having left the heavenly palace, he descends into his mother's womb. Soon after he is born from her right side, he takes seven steps. As he does so, an effulgence illuminates everywhere in the ten quarters and innumerable Buddha-lands shake in six ways. Then he utters these words, "I will become the most honored one in the world." 

Shakra and Brahma reverently attend him, and heavenly beings adore and worship him. He shows his ability in calculation, writing, archery and horsemanship. He is also conversant with the divine arts and well-read in many volumes. In the field outside the palace he trains himself in the martial arts, and at court shows that he also enjoys the pleasures of the senses.

When he first encounters old age, sickness and death, he realizes the impermanence of the world. He renounces his kingdom, wealth and throne, and goes into the mountains to practice the Way. After sending back the white horse that he has been riding, together with the jewelled crown and ornaments which he has been wearing, he takes off his magnificent clothes and puts on a Dharma robe. He cuts his hair and shaves his beard, sits upright under a tree and strives at ascetic practices for six years in accord with the traditional way. Since he has appeared in the world of the five defilements, he behaves as the multitude. And as his body appears dirty, he takes a bath in the Golden River. As a god bends a branch down towards him, he is able to climb up the river bank. A divine bird follows him closely to the seat of Enlightenment. A deva takes the form of a youth and, perceiving a favorable sign, respectfully presents him with the auspicious grass. The Bodhisattva compassionately accepts it, spreads it under the Bodhi-tree and sits upon it with his legs crossed. He emits a great flood of light to inform Mara of this. Mara and his army come to attack and tempt him, but he brings them under control with the power of wisdom and makes them all surrender. Then he attains the supreme Dharma and realizes the highest, perfect Enlightenment.

As Shakra and Brahma request him to turn the Wheel of the Dharma, the Buddha visits various places and preaches the Dharma in his thunderous voice. He beats the Dharma-drum, blows the Dharma-conch, brandishes the Dharma-sword, hoists the Dharma-banner, rolls the Dharma-thunder, hurls the Dharma-lightning, brings the Dharma-rain, and bestows the Dharma-gift. At all times, he awakens the world with the sound of the Dharma. His light illuminates countless Buddha-lands, causing the entire world to quake in six ways. It encompasses Mara's realm, shaking his palace, so that he and his host become frightened and surrender. The bodhisattva tears asunder the net of evil, destroys wrong views, removes afflictions, flushes the gutters of desire, protects the Dharma-castle, opens the Dharma-gate, washes off the grime of the passions, and reveals the pure white Dharma. He unifies everything in the Buddha Dharma, and thus proclaims the right teaching. He enters the town to beg alms; he accepts even rich food to enable the donors to accumulate merit and also to show that he is a field of virtue. Wishing to expound the Dharma, he smiles and so cures the three pains with various Dharma-medicines. He teaches that the aspiration for Enlightenment has immeasurable merit and, by giving predictions to bodhisattvas, he enables them to attain Buddhahood.

He demonstrates that he passes into Nirvana, but endlessly brings sentient beings to emancipation. In removing their defilements, planting various roots of virtue and attaining excellent merit, he displays wonderful and inconceivable works.

Furthermore, each of the bodhisattvas in the assembly is able to visit various Buddha-lands and expound teachings of the Way. His manner of practice is pure and undefiled. Just as a magician with his perfect skill can create at will various illusions, including images of man or woman, at will, so the bodhisattva, having thoroughly learned all the methods of emancipation and attained serene awareness of reality, can freely teach and transform beings. 

He manifests himself everywhere in innumerable Buddha-lands, performing acts of compassion for sentient beings tirelessly and with diligence. He has thus obtained complete mastery of such methods of emancipation. He is thoroughly conversant with the essentials of the sutras for bodhisattvas and, as his fame spreads everywhere, he guides sentient beings throughout the ten quarters. All Buddhas remember him and give him their protection. He has already dwelt in all the Buddha's abodes and performed all the deeds of the Great Sage. 

He proclaims the Tathagata's teachings, acts as a great master for other bodhisattvas and, with profound samadhi and wisdom, guides multitudes of beings. With penetrating insight into the essential nature of dharmas, he discerns different aspects of living beings and closely watches over all the worlds. In making offerings to the Buddhas, he manifests transformed bodies like flashes of lightning. 

Having well learned the extensive wisdom of fearless and having realized the illusory nature of dharmas, he destroys Mara's nets and unties all the bonds of passion. He rises above the stages of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas and attains the samadhis of emptiness, non-form, and non-desire. He skillfully provides expedient means and thus reveals three distinct teachings. 

Then for those of the middle and lower stages, he demonstrates his passing into Nirvana. But, in reality, he is non-active and non-acquisitive, and, being aware that dharmas in themselves neither arise nor perish, he realizes that they are of absolute equality. He has attained innumerable dharanis, a hundred thousand samadhis and various kinds of spiritual faculties and wisdom. With the Meditation of Vast and Universal Tranquillity, he enters deeply into the Dharma-treasury for bodhisattvas. After attaining the Buddha-garland Samadhi, he proclaims and expounds all the sutras. While dwelling deep in meditation, he visualizes all the innumerable Buddhas and in an instant visits every one of them.

By elucidating and teaching the ultimate truth to sentient beings, he delivers them from the state of extreme pains, from the conditions in which suffering is so great as to prevent people from finding time for Buddhist practices, and also from the conditions in which suffering is not so great as to prevent them from doing so. Having attained the Tathagata's thorough knowledge and eloquence, he has fluent command of languages, with which he enlightens all beings. He is above all worldly affairs and his mind, always serene, dwells on the path of emancipation; this gives him complete control over all dharmas. 

Without being asked to do so, he becomes a good friend to each of the multitude of beings and carries their heavy karmic burdens on his back. He upholds the Tathagata's profound Dharma-treasury and protects the seeds of Buddhahood, so that they may continue to multiply. Having awakened great compassion for sentient beings, he kindly expounds the teaching, and endows them with the Dharma-eye. He blocks the paths to the three evil realms, opens the gate of virtue and, without waiting for their request, provides beings with the Dharma. He does this for the multitude of beings just as a dutiful son loves and respects his parents. He indeed looks upon sentient beings as his own self.

With such roots of virtue, all the bodhisattvas in the assembly had reached the shore of emancipation. They had acquired the Buddha's immeasurable merit and attained the sacred, pure and inconceivable wisdom. Innumerable bodhisattvas, mahasattvas, such as these assembled there all at once.

Glorious features of the Buddha

[3] At that time all the senses of the World-Honored One radiated joy, his entire body appeared serene and glorious, and his august countenance looked most majestic. Having perceived the Buddha's holy intention, the Venerable Ananda rose from his seat, bared his right shoulder, prostrated himself, and joining his palms in reverence, said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, today all your senses are radiant with joy, your body is serene and glorious, and your august countenance is as majestic as a clear mirror whose brightness radiates outward and inward. The magnificence of your dignified appearance is unsurpassed and beyond measure. I have never seen you look so superb and majestic as today. With respect, Great Sage, this thought has occurred to me: 'Today, the World-Honored One dwells in the rare and marvelous Dharma; today, the World-Hero dwells in the Buddha's abode; today, the World-Eye concentrates on the performance of the leader's duty; today, the World-Valiant One dwells in the supreme Bodhi; today, the One Most Honored in Heaven realizes the Tathagata's virtue. The Buddhas of the past, present and future contemplate each other. How can this present Buddha not contemplate all other Buddhas?' For what reason does his countenance look so majestic and brilliant?"

Then the World-Honored One said to Ananda, "Tell me, Ananda, whether some god urged you to put this question to the Buddha or whether you asked about his glorious countenance from your own wise observation." Ananda replied to the Buddha, "No god came to prompt me. I asked you about this matter of my own accord."

The Buddha said, "Well said, Ananda. I am very pleased with your question. You have shown profound wisdom and subtle insight in asking me this wise question out of compassion for sentient beings. As the Tathagata, I regard beings of the three worlds with boundless great compassion. The reason for my appearance in the world is to reveal teachings of the Way and save multitudes of beings by endowing them with true benefits. Even in countless millions of kalpas it is difficult to come upon and meet a Tathagata. It is as difficult as seeing an udumbara flower, which blooms very rarely. Your question is of great benefit and will enlighten all heavenly and human beings. Ananda, you should realize that the Tathagata's perfectly enlightened wisdom is unfathomable, capable of leading innumerable beings to emancipation, and that his penetrating insight cannot be obstructed. With just one meal, he is able to live for a hundred thousand kotis of kalpas, or an incalculable and immeasurable length of time, or beyond. Even after that lapse of time, his senses will still be radiant with joy and show no signs of deterioration; his appearance will not change, and his august countenance will look just the same. The reason for this is that the Tathagata's meditation and wisdom are perfect and boundless and that he has attained unrestricted power over all dharmas. Ananda, listen carefully. I shall now expound the Dharma."

Ananda replied, "Yes, I will. With joy in my heart, I wish to hear the Dharma."

53 Past Buddhas

[4] The Buddha said to Ananda, "In the distant past -- innumerable, incalculable and inconceivable kalpas ago -- a Tathagata named Dipankara appeared in the world. Having taught and freed innumerable beings and led them all along the path of Enlightenment, he passed into Nirvana. Next appeared a Tathagata named Far-reaching Light. After him came Moonlight, and then Sandalwood-Incense, King of Beautiful Mountains, Crown of Mount Sumeru, Brilliant like Mount Sumeru, Color of the Moon, Right Recollection, Free of Defilement, Non-attachment, Dragon-deva, Nocturnal Light, Peaceful and Brilliant Peak, Immovable Ground, Exquisite Beryl Flower, Golden Beryl Luster, Gold-treasury, Flaming Light, Fiery Origin, Earth-shaking, Image of the Moon, Sound of the Sun, Flower of Freedom, Glorious Light, Miraculous Power of the Ocean of Enlightenment, Water Light, Great Fragrance, Free of Dust and Defilement, Abandoning Enmity, Flame of Jewels, Beautiful Peak, Heroic Stance, Merit-possessing Wisdom, Outshining the Sun and the Moon, Beryl Light of the Sun and the Moon, Supreme Beryl Light, Highest Peak, Flower of Enlightenment, Brightness of the Moon, Sunlight, King of the Colors of Flowers, Moonlight on the Water, Dispelling the Darkness of Ignorance, Practice of Removing Hindrances, Pure Faith, Storage of Good, Majestic Glory, Wisdom of the Dharma, Call of the Phoenix, Roar of the Lion, Voice of the Dragon and Dwelling-in-the-world. All these Buddhas have already passed into Nirvana.

Lokeshvararaja Buddha and Dharmakara

[5] "Then appeared a Buddha named Lokeshvararaja, the Tathagata, Arhat, Perfectly Enlightened One, Possessed of Wisdom and Practice, Perfected One, Knower of the World, Unsurpassed One, Tamer of Men, Master of Gods and Men, Buddha and World-Honored One.

"At that time there was a king, who, having heard the Buddha's exposition of the Dharma, rejoiced in his heart and awakened aspiration for the highest, perfect Enlightenment. He renounced his kingdom and the throne, and became a monk named Dharmakara. Having superior intelligence, courage and wisdom, he distinguished himself in the world. He went to see the Tathagata Lokeshvararaja, knelt down at his feet, walked round him three times keeping him always on his right, prostrated himself on the ground, and putting his palms together in worship, praised the Buddha with these verses:

Sanbutsuge - Verses praising the Buddha

The shining face of the Buddha is glorious;
Boundless is his magnificence.
Radiant splendor such as his
Is beyond all comparison.
The sun, the moon and the mani-jewel,
Though shining with dazzling brightness,
Are completely dimmed and obscured
As if they were a pile of ink-sticks

The countenance of the Tathagata
Is beyond compare in the whole world.
The great voice of the Enlightened One
Resounds throughout the ten regions.
His morality, learning, endeavor,
Absorption in meditation, wisdom
And magnificent virtues have no equal;
They are wonderful and unsurpassed.

He meditates deeply and directly
On the oceanic Dharma of all the Buddhas.
He knows its depth and breadth
And penetrates to its farthest end.
Ignorance, greed and anger
Are forever absent in the World-Honored One.
He is the lion, the most valiant of all men;
His glorious virtue is unlimited.

His meritorious achievements are vast;
His wisdom is deep and sublime.
His light, with awe-inspiring glory, 
Shakes the universe of a thousand million worlds.
I resolve to become a Buddha,
Equal in attainment to you, O holy king of the Dharma,
To save living beings from birth-and-death,
And to lead them all to emancipation.

My discipline in giving, mind-control,
Moral virtues, forbearance and effort,
And also in meditation and wisdom,
Shall be supreme and unsurpassed.
I vow that, when I have become a Buddha,
I shall carry out this promise everywhere;
And to all fear-ridden beings
Shall I give great peace.

Even though there are Buddhas,
A thousand million kotis in number,
And multiudes of great sages
Countless as the sands of the Ganges,
I shall make offerings
To all those Buddhas.
I shall seek the supreme Way
Resolutely and tirelessly.

Even though the Buddha-lands are as innumerable
As the sands of the Ganges,
And other regions and worlds
Are also without number,
My light shall shine everywhere,
Pervading all those lands.
Such being the result of my efforts,
My glorious power shall be immeasurable.

When I have become a Buddha,
My land shall be most exquisite,
And its people wonderful and unexcelled;
The seat of Enlightenment shall be supreme.
My land, being like Nirvana itself,
Shall be beyond comparison.
I take pity on living beings
And resolve to save them all.

Those who come from the ten quarters
Shall find joy and serenity of heart;
When they reach my land,
They shall dwell in peace and happiness.
I beg you, the Buddha, to become my witness
And to vouch for the truth of my aspiration.
Having now made my vows to you,
I will strive to fulfilll them.

The World-Honored Ones in the ten quarters
Have unimpeded wisdom;
I call upon those Honored Ones
To bear witness to my intention.
Even though I must remain
In a state of extreme pain,
I will diligently practice,
Enduring all hardships with tireless vigor."

Dharmakara's resolution to become a Buddha

[6] The Buddha said to Ananda, "Having spoken these verses, the Bhiksu Dharmakara said to the Buddha Lokeshvararaja, 'Respectfully, World-Honored One, I announce that I have awakened aspiration for the highest, perfect Enlightenment. I beseech you to explain the Dharma to me fully, so that I can perform practices for the establishment of a pure Buddha-land adorned with infinite excellent qualities. So please teach me how to attain Enlightenment quickly and to remove the roots of afflictions of birth-and-death for all.'"

The Buddha said to Ananda, "At that time the Buddha Lokeshvararaja replied to the Bhiksu Dharmakara, 'You yourself should know by what practice you can establish a glorious Buddha-land.' The Bhiksu said to the Buddha, 'That is far too vast and deep for my comprehension. I sincerely beseech you, World-Honored One, to explain in detail the practices by which Buddhas, Tathagatas, established their pure lands. After I hear that, I wish to practice as instructed and so fulfill my aspirations.'

"At that time the Buddha Lokeshvararaja recognized the Bhiksu Dharmakara's noble and high aspirations, and taught him as follows: 'If, for example, one keeps on bailing water out of a great ocean with a pint-measure, one will be able to reach the bottom after many kalpas and then obtain rare treasures. Likewise, if one sincerely, diligently and unceasingly seeks the Way, one will be able to reach one's destination. What vow is there which cannot be fulfilled?'

"Then the Buddha Lokeshvararaja explained in detail the greater and lesser aspects of two hundred and ten kotis of Buddha-lands, together with the good and evil natures of heavenly and human beings living there. He revealed them all to the Bhiksu just as he had requested. Then the Bhiksu, having heard the Buddha's exposition of the glorious pure land and also having seen all of them, resolved upon his supreme, unsurpassed vows. His mind being serene and his aspirations free of attachment, he was unexcelled throughout the world. For five full kalpas he contemplated the vows, and then chose the pure practices for the establishment of his Buddha-land." Ananda asked the Buddha, "How long was the life-span of beings in the land of the Buddha Lokeshvararaja?"

The Buddha replied, "The length of life of that Buddha was forty-two kalpas."

He continued, "After that Dharmakara Bodhisattva adopted the pure practices which had led to the establishment of the excellent lands of two hundred and ten kotis of Buddhas. When he had finished this task, he went to the Buddha, knelt down at his feet, walked round him three times, joined his palms in worship and sat down. He then said to the Buddha, 'I have adopted the pure practices for the establishment of a glorious Buddha-land.' The Buddha said to him, 'You should proclaim this. Know that now is the right time. Encourage and delight the entire assembly. Hearing this, other bodhisattvas will practice this Dharma and so fulfill their innumerable great vows.' The Bhiksu replied, 'I beg you to grant me your attention. Now I will fully proclaim my vows.'

Dharmakara's 48 Vows

[7] (1) If, when I attain Buddhahood, there should be in my land a hell, a realm of hungry spirits or a realm of animals, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(2) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should after death fall again into the three evil realms, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(3) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not all be the color of pure gold, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(4) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not all be of one appearance, and should there be any difference in beauty, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(5) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not remember all their previous lives, not knowing even the events which occurred during the previous hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of kalpas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(6) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not possess the divine eye of seeing even a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of Buddha-lands, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(7) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not possess the divine ear of hearing the teachings of at least a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of Buddhas and should not remember all of them, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(8) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not possess the faculty of knowing the thoughts of others, at least those of all sentient beings living in a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of Buddha-lands, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(9) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not possess the supernatural power of travelling anywhere in one instant, even beyond a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of Buddha-lands, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(10) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should give rise to thoughts of self-attachment, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(11) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not dwell in the Definitely Assured State and unfailingly reach Nirvana, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(12) If, when I attain Buddhahood, my light should be limited, unable to illuminate at least a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of Buddha-lands, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(13) If, when I attain Buddhahood, my life-span should be limited, even to the extent of a hundred thousand kotis of nayutas of kalpas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(14) If, when I attain Buddhahood, the number of the shravakas in my land could be known, even if all the beings and pratyekabuddhas living in this universe of a thousand million worlds should count them during a hundred thousand kalpas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(15) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should have limited life-spans, except when they wish to shorten them in accordance with their original vows, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(16) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should even hear of any wrongdoing, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(17) If, when I attain Buddhahood, innumerable Buddhas in the land of the ten quarters should not all praise and glorify my Name, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(18) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings in the lands of the ten quarters who sincerely and joyfully entrust themselves to me, desire to be born in my land, and call my Name, even ten times, should not be born there, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment. Excluded, however, are those who commit the five gravest offences and abuse the right Dharma.

(19) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings in the lands of the ten quarters, who awaken aspiration for Enlightenment, do various meritorious deeds and sincerely desire to be born in my land, should not, at their death, see me appear before them surrounded by a multitude of sages, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(20) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings in the lands of the ten quarters who, having heard my Name, concentrate their thoughts on my land, plant roots of virtue, and sincerely transfer their merits towards my land with a desire to be born there, should not eventually fulfill their aspiration, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(21) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not all be endowed with the thirty-two physical characteristics of a Great Man, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(22) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the Buddha-lands of other quarters who visit my land should not ultimately and unfailingly reach the Stage of Becoming a Buddha after One More Life, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment. Excepted are those who wish to teach and guide sentient beings in accordance with their original vows. For they wear the armour of great vows, accumulate merits, deliver all beings from birth-and-death, visit Buddha-lands to perform the bodhisattva practices, make offerings to Buddhas, Tathagatas, throughout the ten quarters, enlighten uncountable sentient beings as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, and establish them in the highest, perfect Enlightenment. Such bodhisattvas transcend the course of practice of the ordinary bodhisattvas, manifest the practices of all the bodhisattva stages, and cultivate the virtues of Samantabhadra.

(23) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land, in order to make offerings to Buddhas through my transcendent power, should not be able to reach immeasurable and innumerable kotis of nayutas of Buddha-lands in as short a time as it takes to eat a meal, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(24) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land should not be able, as they wish, to perform meritorious acts of worshipping the Buddhas with the offerings of their choice, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(25) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land should not be able to expound the Dharma with the all-knowing wisdom, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(26) If, when I attain Buddhahood, there should be any bodhisattva in my land not endowed with the body of the Vajra-god Narayana, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(27) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings should be able, even with the divine eye, to distinguish by name calculate by number all the myriads of manifestations provided for the humans and devas in my land, which are glorious and resplendent and have exquisite details beyond description, may I not attain perfect Enlightenmet.

(28) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land, even those with little store of merit, should not be able to see the Bodhi-tree which has countless colors and is four million li in height, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(29) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land should not acquire eloquence and wisdom in upholding sutras and reciting and expounding them, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(30) If, when I attain Buddhahood, the wisdom and eloquence of bodhisattvas in my land should be limited, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(31) If, when I attain Buddhahood, my land should not be resplendent, revealing in its light all the immeasurable, innumerable and inconceivable Buddha-lands, like images reflected in a clear mirror, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(32) If, when I attain Buddhahood, all the myriads of manifestations in my land, from the ground to the sky, such as palaces, pavilions, ponds, streams and trees, should not be composed of both countless treasures, which surpass in supreme excellence anything in the worlds of humans and devas, and of a hundred thousand kinds of aromatic wood, whose fragrance pervades all the worlds of the ten quarters, causing all bodhisattvas who sense it to perform Buddhist practices, then may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(33) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings in the immeasurable and inconceivable Buddha-lands of the ten quarters, who have been touched by my light, should not feel peace and happiness in their bodies and minds surpassing those of humans and devas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(34) If, when I attain Buddhahood, sentient beings in the immeasurable and inconceivable Buddha-lands of the ten quarters, who have heard my Name, should not gain the bodhisattva's insight into the non-arising of all dharmas and should not acquire various profound dharanis, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(35) If, when I attain Buddhahood, women in the immeasurable and inconceivable Buddha-lands of the ten quarters who, having heard my Name, rejoice in faith, awaken aspiration for Enlightenment and wish to renounce womanhood, should after death be reborn again as women, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(36) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the immeasurable and inconceivable Buddha-lands of the ten quarters, who have heard my Name, should not, after the end of their lives, always perform sacred practices until they reach Buddhahood, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(37) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in the immeasurable and inconceivable Buddha-lands of the ten quarters, who having heard my Name, prostrate themselves on the ground to revere and worship me, rejoice in faith, and perform bodhisattva practices, should not be respected by all devas and people of the world, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(38) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not obtain clothing, as soon as such a desire arises in their minds, and if the fine robes as prescribed and praised by the Buddhas should not be spontaneously provided for them to wear, and if these clothes should need sewing, bleaching, dyeing or washing, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(39) If, when I attain Buddhahood, humans and devas in my land should not enjoy happiness and pleasure comparable to that of a monk who has exhausted all the passions, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(40) If, when I attain Buddhahood, the bodhisattvas in my land who wish to see the immeasurable glorious Buddha-lands of the ten quarters, should not be able to view all of them reflected in the jewelled trees, just as one sees one's face reflected in a clear mirror, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(41) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should, at any time before becoming Buddhas, have impaired, inferior or incomplete sense organs, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(42) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not all attain the samadhi called 'pure emancipation' and, while dwelling therein, without losing concentration, should not be able to make offerings in one instant to immeasurable and inconceivable Buddhas, World-Honored Ones, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(43) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not be reborn into noble families after their death, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(44) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not rejoice so greatly as to dance and perform the bodhisattva practices and should not acquire stores of merit, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(45) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not all attain the samadhi called 'universal equality' and, while dwelling therein, should not always be able to see all the immeasurable and inconceivable Tathagatas until those bodhisattvas, too, become Buddhas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(46) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in my land should not be able to hear spontaneously whatever teachings they may wish, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(47) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not instantly reach the Stage of Non-retrogression, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

(48) If, when I attain Buddhahood, bodhisattvas in the lands of the other quarters who hear my Name should not instantly gain the first, second and third insights into the nature of dharmas and firmly abide in the truths realized by all the Buddhas, may I not attain perfect Enlightenment."

Juseige - Verses confirming the 48 Vows

[8] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The Bhiksu Dharmakara, having thus
proclaimed those vows, spoke the following verses:

I have made vows, unrivaled in all the world;
I will certainly reach the unsurpassed Way.
If these vows should not be fulfilled,
May I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

If I should not become a great benefactor
In lives to come for immeasurable kalpas
To save the poor and the afflicted everywhere,
May I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

When I attain Buddhahood,
My Name shall be heard throughout the ten quarters;
Should there be any place where it is not heard,
May I not attain perfect Enlightenment.

Free of greed and with deep, perfect mindfulness
And pure wisdom, I will perform the sacred practices;
I will seek to attain the unsurpassed Way
And become the teacher of devas and humans.

With my divine power I will display great light,
Illuminating the worlds without limit,
And dispel the darkness of the three defilements;
Thus I will deliver all beings from misery.

Having obtained the eye of wisdom,
I will remove the darkness of ignorance;
I will block all the evil paths
And open the gate to the good realms.

When merits and virtues are perfected,
My majestic light shall radiate in the ten quarters,
Outshining the sun and the moon
And surpassing the brilliance of the heavens.

I will open the Dharma-store for the multitudes
And endow them all with treasures of merit.
Being always among the multitudes,
I will proclaim the Dharma with the lion's roar.

I will make offerings to all the Buddhas,
Thereby acquiring roots of virtue.
When my vows are fulfilled and my wisdom perfected,
I shall be the sovereign of the three worlds.

Like your unhindered wisdom, O Buddha,
Mine shall reach everywhere, illuminating all;
May my supreme wisdom
Be like yours, Most Excellent Honored One.

If these vows are to be fulfilled,
Let this universe of a thousand million worlds shake in response 
And let all the devas in heaven
Rain down rare and marvelous flowers."

Dharmakara's practices of the Bodhisattva Path

[9] The Buddha said to Ananda, "As soon as the Bhiksu Dharmakara spoke those verses, the entire earth shook in six ways, and a rain of wonderful flowers fell from heaven, scattering everywhere. Spontaneous music was heard, and a voice in the sky said, 'Surely you will attain the highest, perfect Enlightenment. "Then the Bhiksu Dharmakara kept all those great vows which were sincere, unfailing and unsurpassed in the whole world, and intensely aspired to attain Nirvana.

"Then, Ananda, after proclaiming and establishing those universal vows in the presence of the Buddha Lokeshvararaja before the multitude of beings, including the eight kinds of superhuman beings, such as devas and dragon-spirits, and also Mara and Brahma, the Bhiksu Dharmakara was solely intent on producing a glorious and exquisite land. The Buddha-land which he sought to establish was vast in extent, unsurpassed and supremely wonderful, always present and subject neither to decay nor change. During inconceivable and innumerable kalpas, he cultivated the immeasurable meritorious practices of the Bodhisattva Path.

"He did not harbor any thought of greed, hatred or cruelty; nor did he allow any ideas of greed, hatred or cruelty to arise. He was unattached to any form, sound, smell, taste, touch or idea. Possessed of the power to persevere, he did not avoid undergoing various afflictions. Having little desire for his own sake, he knew contentment. Without any impure thought, enmity or stupidity, he dwelt continually in tranquil samadhi. His wisdom was unobstructed, and his mind free of falsehood and deceitfulness. With an expression of tenderness in his face and with kindness in his speech, he spoke to others in consonance with their inner thoughts. Courageous and diligent, strong-willed and untiring, he devoted himself solely to the pursuit of the pure Dharma, thereby benefiting a multitude of beings. He revered the Three Treasures, respected his teachers and elders, and thus adorned his practices with a great store of merits. By so doing, he enabled sentient beings to partake of it.

"He dwelt in the realization that all dharmas are empty, devoid of distinctive features, and not to be sought after, and that they neither act nor arise; he thus realized that all dharmas are like magical creations. He avoided all wrong speech that would bring harm upon himself or others or both; he engaged in right speech that would bring benefit to himself or others or both. He abandoned his kingdom and renounced the throne, leaving behind wealth and sensuous pleasures. Practicing the Six Paramitas himself, he taught others to do the same. During innumerable kalpas, he accumulated merits and amassed virtues.

"Wherever he was born, an immeasurable stock of treasure spontaneously appeared as he wished. He taught countless sentient beings and guided them on the path of the highest, true Enlightenment. He was reborn as a rich man, a lay devotee, a member of the highest caste or of a noble family, a ksatriya king, a wheel-turning monarch, a king of one of the six heavens in the world of desire, or even higher, as a Brahma-king. He revered and worshipped all Buddhas by making the four kinds of offering to them. The merit he thus acquired was indescribably great. Fragrance issued from his mouth as from a blue lotus-flower, and every pore of his body emitted the scent of sandalwood, which permeated innumerable worlds. His appearance was majestic, and his physical characteristics and marks were truly wonderful. From his hands, inexhaustible treasures, clothes, food and drink, rare and exquisite flowers and incense, silken canopies, banners, and other ornaments were produced. In such manifestations he was unrivaled among all heavenly and human beings. He thus attained the command of all dharmas."

Dharmakara's attainment of Buddhahood

[10] Ananda asked the Buddha, "Has the Bodhisattva Dharmakara already attained Buddhahood and then passed into Nirvana? Or has he not yet attained Buddhahood? Or is he dwelling somewhere at present?" The Buddha replied to Ananda, "The Bodhisattva Dharmakara has already attained Buddhahood and is now dwelling in a western Buddha-land, called 'Peace and Bliss,' a hundred thousand kotis of lands away from here."

Ananda further asked the Buddha, "How much time has passed since he attained Buddhahood?"

The Buddha replied, "Since he attained Buddhahood, about ten kalpas have passed."

He continued, "In that Buddha-land, the earth is composed of seven jewels --namely, gold, silver, beryl, coral, amber, agate and ruby -- which have spontaneously appeared. The land itself is so vast, spreading boundlessly to the farthest extent, that it is impossible to know its limit. All the rays of light from those jewels intermingle and create manifold reflections, producing a dazzling illumination. Those pure, superb and exquisite adornments are unsurpassed in all the worlds of the ten quarters. They are the finest of all gems, and are like those of the Sixth Heaven. In that land, there are no mountains, such as Mount Sumeru and the Encircling Adamantine Mountains. Likewise, there are neither oceans nor seas, valleys nor gorges. But one can see those manifestations by the Buddha's power if one so wishes. In that land there is no hell; neither are there realms of hungry spirits and animals nor other adverse conditions. Neither do the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter exist. It is always moderate and pleasant, never cold or hot."

Then, Ananda asked the Buddha, "If, World-Honored One, there is no Mount Sumeru in that land, what sustains the Heaven of the Four Kings and the Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods?"

The Buddha said to Ananda, "What sustains Yama, which is the Third Heaven of the world of desire, and other heavens up to the Highest Heaven of the world of form?"

Ananda answered, "The consequences of karma are inconceivable." The Buddha said to Ananda, "Inconceivable indeed are the consequences of karma, and so are the worlds of the Buddhas. By the power of meritorious deeds, sentient beings in that land dwell on the ground of karmic reward. That is why those heavens exist without Mount Sumeru."

Ananda continued, "I do not doubt this myself but have asked you about it simply because I wished to remove such doubts for the benefit of sentient beings in the future."

Amida's light

[11] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The majestic light of the Buddha Amitayus is the most exalted. No other Buddha's light can match his. The light of some Buddhas illuminates a hundred Buddha-lands, and that of others, a thousand Buddha-lands. Briefly, that of Amitayus illuminates the eastern Buddha-land, as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges. In the same way, it illuminates the Buddha-lands in the south, west and north, in each of the four intermediate quarters, above and below. Further, the light of some Buddhas extends seven feet; that of others, one yojana, or two, three, four or five yojanas; and the distance covered increases in this way until the light of some Buddhas illuminates one Buddha-land. "For this reason, Amitayus is called by the following names: the Buddha of Infinite Light, the Buddha of Boundless Light, the Buddha of Unhindered Light, the Buddha of Incomparable Light, the Buddha of the Light of the King of Flame, the Buddha of Pure Light, the Buddha of the Light of Joy, the Buddha of Light of Wisdom, the Buddha of Unceasing Light, the Buddha of Inconceivable Light, the Buddha of Ineffable Light, and the Buddha of the Light Outshining the Sun and the Moon.

"If, sentient beings encounter his light, their three defilements are removed; they feel tenderness, joy and pleasure; and good thoughts arise. If sentient beings in the three realms of suffering see his light, they will all be relieved and freed from affliction. At the end of their lives, they all reach emancipation.

"The light of Amitayus shines brilliantly, illuminating all the Buddha-lands of the ten quarters. There is no place where it is not perceived. I am not the only one who now praises his light. All the Buddhas, shravakas, pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas praise and glorify it in the same way. If sentient beings, having heard of the majestic virtue of his light, glorify it continually, day and night, with sincerity of heart, they will be able to attain birth in his land, as they wish. Then the multitudes of bodhisattvas and shravakas will praise their excellent virtue. Later, when they attain Buddhahood, all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas in the ten quarters will praise their light, just as I now praise the light of Amitayus."

The Buddha continued, "The majestic glory of the light of Amitayus could not be exhaustively described even if I praised it continuously, day and night, for the period of one kalpa."

Amida's life-span

[12] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The life of Amitayus is so long that it is impossible for anyone to calculate it. To give an illustration, let us suppose that all the innumerable sentient beings in the worlds of the ten quarters were reborn in human form and that every one became a shravaka or pratyekabuddha. Even if they assembled in one place, concentrated their thoughts, and exercised the power of their wisdom to the utmost to reckon the length of the Buddha's life, even after a thousand million kalpas they could still not reach its limit. So it is with the life-span of shravakas, bodhisattvas, heavenly beings and human beings in his land. Similarly, it is not to be encompassed by any means of reckoning or by any metaphorical expression. Again, the number of the shravakas and bodhisattvas living there is incalculable. They are fully endowed with transcendent wisdom and free in their exercise of majestic power; they could hold the entire world in their hands."

The number of the audience at the first assembly

[13] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The number of shravakas at the first teaching assembly of that Buddha was incalculable; so was the number of the bodhisattvas. Even if an immeasurable and uncountable number of humans multiplied by millions of kotis should all become like Mahamaudgalyayana and together reckon their number during innumerable nayutas of kalpas, or even until they attain Nirvana, they could still not know that number. Let us suppose that there is a great ocean, infinitely deep and wide, and that one takes a drop of water out of it with a hundredth part of a split hair. How would you compare that drop of water with the rest of the ocean?" Ananda replied, "When the drop of water is compared with the great ocean, it is impossible even for one skilled in astronomy or mathematics to know the proportion, or for anyone to describe it by any rhetorical or metaphorical expressions."

The Buddha said to Ananda, "Even if people like Mahamaudgalyayana were to count for millions of kotis of kalpas, the number of the shravakas and bodhisattvas at the first teaching assembly who could be counted would be like a drop of water, and the number of sages yet to be counted would be like the rest of the ocean."

Jewelled trees

[14] Again, seven-jewelled trees completely fill that land. There are some made of gold, some of silver, and others made of beryl, crystal, coral, ruby or agate. There are also trees made of two to seven kinds of jewels. "There are gold trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of silver; silver trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of gold; beryl trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of crystal; crystal trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of beryl; coral trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of ruby; ruby trees with leaves, flowers and fruits of beryl; agate trees with leaves, flowers and fruits made of various jewels. "Again, there are jewelled trees with purple-gold roots, white-silver trunks, beryl branches, crystal twigs, coral leaves, ruby flowers and agate fruits. There are jewelled trees with white-silver roots, beryl trunks, crystal branches, coral twigs, ruby leaves, agate flowers and purple-gold fruits. There are jewelled trees with beryl roots, crystal trunks, coral branches, ruby twigs, agate leaves, purple-gold flowers and white-silver fruits. There are jewelled trees with crystal roots, coral trunks, ruby branches, agate twigs, purple-gold leaves, white-silver flowers and beryl fruits. There are jewelled trees with coral roots, ruby trunks, agate branches, purple-gold twigs, white-silver leaves, beryl flowers and crystal fruits. There are jewelled trees with ruby roots, agate trunks, purple-gold branches, white-silver twigs, beryl leaves, crystal flowers and coral fruits. There are jewelled trees with agate roots, purple-gold trunks, white-silver branches, beryl twigs, crystal leaves, coral flowers and ruby fruits.

"These jewelled trees are in parallel rows, their trunks are evenly spaced, their branches are in level layers, their leaves are symmetrical, their flowers harmonize, and their fruits are well arranged. The brilliant colors of these trees are so luxuriant that it is impossible to see them all. When a pure breeze wafts through them, exquisite sounds of the pentatonic scales, such as kung and shang, spontaneously arise and make symphonic music.

The Bodhi-tree

[15] "Again, the Bodhi-tree of the Buddha Amitayus is four million li in height and five thousand yojanas in circumference at its base. Its branches spread two hundred thousand li in each of the four directions. It is a natural cluster of all kinds of precious stones and is adorned with the kings of jewels, namely, moon-light mani gems and ocean-supporting-wheel gems.

Everywhere between its twigs hang jewelled ornaments with a thousand million different colors intermingling in various ways, and their innumerable beams shine with the utmost brilliance. The Bodhi-tree itself is covered with nets of rare, excellent gems, and on it appear all kinds of ornaments in accordance with one's wishes.

"When a gentle breeze wafts through its branches and leaves, innumerable exquisite Dharma-sounds arise, which spread far and wide, pervading all the other Buddha-lands in the ten quarters. Those who hear the sounds attain penetrating insight into dharmas and dwell in the Stage of Non-retrogression. Until they attain Buddhahood, their senses of hearing will remain clear and sharp, and they will not suffer from any pain or sickness. Whether they hear the sounds of the Bodhi-tree, see its colors, smell its perfumes, taste its flavors, perceive its lights or conceive of the Dharma in their minds, they all attain profoundly penetrating insight into dharmas and dwell in the Stage of Non-retrogression. Until they attain Buddhahood, their six sense-organs will remain sharp and clear, and they will not suffer from any pain or disease.

"Ananda, when humans and devas of that land see the Bodhi-tree, they will attain three insights: first, insight into reality through hearing the sacred sounds; second, insight into reality by being in accord with it; and third, the insight into the non-arising of all dharmas. These benefits are all bestowed by the majestic power of Amitayus, the power of his primal vow, his perfectly fulfilled vow, his clear and manifest vow, his firm vow, and his accomplished vow."

The Buddha said to Ananda, "A king of this world possesses a hundred thousand kinds of music. From the realm ruled by a wheel-turning monarch up to the Sixth Heaven, the sounds of the music produced in each higher realm are ten million kotis of times superior to those of a lower one. The thousands of varieties of musical sound produced in the Sixth Heaven are a thousand kotis of times inferior to one sound produced from the seven-jewelled trees in the land of Amitayus. Again, in that land, there are thousands of varieties of natural music, which are all, without exception, sounds of the Dharma. They are clear and serene, full of depth and resonance, delicate and harmonious; they are the most excellent of sounds in all the worlds of the ten quarters.

Glorious adornments

[16] "Again, the halls, monasteries, palaces and pavilions are spontaneous apparitions, all adorned with the seven jewels and hung with curtains of various other jewels, such as pearls and moon-bright mani gems. "Inside and out, to right and left, are bathing pools. Some of them are ten yojanas in length, breadth and depth; some are twenty yojanas, others, thirty, and so on, until we come to those measuring a hundred thousand yojanas in length, breadth and depth. They are brimful of the water of eight excellent qualities, clear, fragrant and tasting like nectar.

"There are golden pools with beds of silver sand; silver pools with beds of golden sand; crystal pools with beds of beryl sand; beryl pools with beds of crystal sand; coral pools with beds of amber sand; amber pools with beds of coral sand; agate pools with beds of ruby sand; ruby pools with beds of agate sand; white-jade pools with beds of purple-gold sand; purple-gold pools with beds of white-jade sand. Others are composed of two to seven jewels.

"On the banks of these pools are sandalwood trees, whose flowers and leaves hang down and diffuse perfumes everywhere. Heavenly lotuses of blue, pink, yellow and white bloom profusely in various tints and tones, completely covering the surface of the water.

"If bodhisattvas and shravakas in that land enter the jewel-ponds and wish the water to rise to their ankles, it rises to their ankles. If they wish it to rise to their knees, it rises to their knees. If they wish it to rise to their waists, it rises to their waists. If they wish it to rise to their necks, it rises to their necks. If they wish it to pour over their bodies, it spontaneously pours over their bodies. If they wish it to recede, it recedes. Its temperature is moderate, cool or warm, according to their wishes. The water comforts the body and refreshes the mind, washing away their mental defilements. Clear and pure, the water is so transparent that it seems formless. The jewel-sand shines so brightly that even the depth of the water cannot prevent its brilliance from being seen. The rippling water forms meandering streams, which join and flow into each other. Their movement is peaceful and quiet, neither too fast nor too slow, and their ripples spontaneously produce innumerable wonderful sounds. One can hear whatever sound one wishes. For example, some hear the sound 'Buddha,' some hear the sound 'Dharma,' some 'Sangha,' others hear 'tranquillity,' 'emptiness and non-self,' 'great compassion,' 'paramita,' 'ten powers,' 'fearlessness,' 'special qualities,' 'supernatural powers,' 'non-activity,' 'neither arising nor perishing,' 'insight into the non-arising of all dharmas,' and so on until the various sounds of the wonderful Dharma, such as 'the sprinkling of nectar upon the head of a bodhisattva,' are heard. As one hears those sounds, one attains immeasurable joy and accords with the principles of purity, absence of desires, extinction, and reality. One is in harmony with the Three Treasures, the Buddha's powers, fearlessness and special qualities, and also with supernatural powers and other methods of practice for bodhisattvas and shravakas. Not even the names of the three realms of suffering are heard there, but only Nirvanic sounds of bliss. For this reason, that land is called 'Peace and Bliss'."

Bodily appearance of the inhabitants and the pleasures they enjoy

[17] "Ananda, those born in that Buddha-land are endowed with such bodies of purity and provided with various exquisite sounds, supernatural powers and virtues. The palaces in which they dwell, their clothing, food and drink, the wonderful flowers, and the various kinds of incense and adornments are like those naturally provided in the Sixth Heaven of the world of desire.

"At mealtimes, plates made of the seven jewels -- namely, gold, silver, beryl, agate, ruby, coral, and amber, and also moon-bright pearl --spontaneously appear, filled with food and drink of a hundred tastes, according to one's wishes. Although the food is offered, no one actually eats it. Once it has been seen and smelt, one naturally feels that it has been eaten, and so is satisfied; thus one feels relaxed in mind and body, free from attachment to the sense of taste. When the meal is over, everything disappears, but reappears at the next mealtime.

"That Buddha-land, like the realm of unconditioned Nirvana, is pure and serene, resplendent and blissful. The shravakas, bodhisattvas, heavenly beings and humans there have lofty and brilliant wisdom, and are masters of the supernatural powers. They are all of one form, without any differences, but are called 'heavenly beings' and 'humans' simply by analogy with the states of existence in other worlds. They are of noble and majestic countenance, unequaled in all the worlds, and their appearance is superb, unmatched by any being, heavenly or human. They are all endowed with bodies of Naturalness, Emptiness, and Infinity."

Karmic rewards of a beggar and a king

[18] The Buddha said to Ananda, "If a beggar in extreme poverty sits by the side of a king, how can their appearances be compared?"

Ananda replied, "If such a man sits by the side of a king, his emaciated, mean and ragged appearance cannot be compared with the king's. His appearance is a thousand million kotis or even incalculable times inferior to the king's. What is the reason for this? The conditions of a beggar in extreme poverty--being at the lowest social level, with barely enough clothes to cover his body, scarcely enough food to sustain his life, with hunger and cold always tormenting him, and having almost lost in human contact -- are all the result of his misdeeds in former lives. In the past he did not cultivate roots of virtue, but instead, accumulated riches without giving anything to others. He became more miserly as his wealth increased, desired to obtain more, insatiably hankered after further acquisitions and gave no thought to good actions. Thus he piled up a mountain of evil karma. When his life ended, all his wealth was gone, and what he had accumulated with great toil and worry was of no avail to him; all passed in vain into the possession of others. Having no stock of merit on which to depend and no virtue on which to rely, after death he fell into one of the evil realms, where he suffered pain for a long period. When his karmic retributions ended, he was able to escape, but was reborn into a lower class; being foolish, base and inferior, he barely maintains the appearance of a human being.

"The king of a country is the most Honored of all men. This is the reward for virtues accumulated in former lives, in which he, with a compassionate heart, gave generously to many, saved people from suffering through kindness and benevolence, performed good deeds with sincerity, and never disputed with others. When that life ended, he was rewarded by rebirth into a higher state. Born in a heavenly realm, he enjoyed bliss and happiness. His accumulated virtues produced such a surplus of goodness that, when he was reborn as a man in this life, his birth was, deservedly, into a royal family. Being naturally noble, his dignified and majestic demeanor commands the respect of his people, and superb clothes and sumptuous food are prepared and served to him as he pleases. All this is a reward for virtues from his past lives."

Comparison between heavens and the Pure Land

[19] The Buddha said to Ananda, "What you say is true. Even though a king is the noblest of all men and has a regal countenance, if he is compared with a wheel-turning monarch, he will appear as base and inferior as a beggar beside a king. Likewise, however excellent and unrivaled the majestic appearance of such a monarch may be, if he is compared with the lord of the Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods, he will also appear incomparably inferior, even ten thousands kotis of times more so. Again, if this heavenly lord is compared with the lord of the Sixth Heaven, he will appear a hundred thousand kotis of times inferior. If the lord of the Sixth Heaven is compared with a bodhisattva or a shravaka dwelling in the land of Amitayus, his countenance and appearance will be far from matching those of the bodhisattva or shravaka, being a thousand million kotis of times or even incalculable times inferior."

Pleasures in the Pure Land

[20] The Buddha said to Ananda, "Devas and humans in the land of Amitayus are each provided with robes, food and drink, flowers, perfume, ornaments, silken canopies and banners, and are surrounded by exquisite sounds. Their abodes, palaces, and pavilions are exactly in accordance with the size of their bodies. One, two or even innumerable jewels appear before them, as soon as they wish. In addition, beautiful jewelled fabric covers the ground where all the devas and humans walk. In that Buddha-land there are innumerable jewelled nets, all adorned with skeins of gold thread, pearls, and a hundred thousand kinds of rare and marvelous treasures. All around the nets hang jewelled bells of the utmost beauty, which shine brilliantly. When a natural breeze of virtue arises and gently blows, it is moderate in temperature, neither cold nor hot, refreshing and soft to the senses, and moves neither too slowly nor too quickly. When the breeze wafts over the nets and the various jewelled trees, countless excellent sounds of the Dharma are heard, and ten thousand kinds of delicate fragrances of virtue are diffused. If one smells those fragrances, one's impurities and passions spontaneously cease to arise. If touched by the breeze itself, one enjoys the same pleasure as a monk who has entered the Samadhi of Extinction.

Flowers and innumerable rays of light emitted from them

[21] "Again, as the breeze blows, flowers are scattered throughout the Buddha-land; they spontaneously divide into different colors, not mixed together. They are soft and pleasant to touch, glow brilliantly, and diffuse rich fragrances. When one's foot is placed on them, they sink down four inches, but when the foot is lifted, they rise to their former level. When the flowers have served their purpose, the earth opens up and they vanish, leaving the ground clean and without trace of them. At the right moment, six times a day, the breeze wafts, scattering the flowers in this way. Moreover, lotus-flowers of various jewels fill the land; each has a hundred thousand kotis of petals with lights of numerous colors -- blue lotuses glow with a blue light, white ones with a white light, and, likewise, dark blue, yellow, red, and purple lotuses glow with lights of their respective colors. The brilliance of these lights is so magnificent that it outshines the sun and the moon. Each flower emits thirty-six hundred thousand kotis of rays of light, each sending forth thirty-six hundred thousand kotis of Buddhas. The bodies of these Buddhas are purple-gold, and their physical characteristics and marks are superb beyond compare. Each Buddha emits a hundred thousand rays of light and expounds the wonderful Dharma to beings in the ten quarters, thus setting innumerable beings on the right Path of the Buddha.

Fulfillment of the 11th, 17th, and 18th vows

[22] The Buddha said to Ananda, "Sentient beings who are born in that Buddha-land all reside among those assured of Nirvana. The reason is that in that land there are neither beings who are destined to adverse conditions nor those whose destinies are uncertain.

"All Buddhas, Tathagatas, in the ten quarters, as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, together praise the inconceivable, supernal virtue of Amitayus. All sentient beings who, having heard his Name, rejoice in faith, remember him even once and sincerely transfer the merit of virtuous practices to that land, aspiring to be born there, will attain birth and dwell in the Stage of Non-retrogression. But excluded are those who have committed the five gravest offenses and abused the right Dharma."



Three grades of aspirants

(1. The higher grade)

[23] The Buddha said to Ananda, "Devas and humans in the worlds of the ten quarters who sincerely aspire to be born in that land can be classified into three grades. The higher grade of aspirants are those who leave their homes and abandon worldly desires to become monks. Having awakened aspiration for Enlightenment, they single-mindedly remember Amitayus and perform meritorious practices, aspiring to be born in his land. When they are about to die, Amitayus, together with a host of sages, will appear before them. Then they will follow him and attain birth in his land. At once they will be born by transformation spontaneously from within seven-jewelled lotus-flowers. They will dwell in the Stage of Non-retrogression, attain steadfast wisdom and be capable of freely exercising supernatural powers. For this reason, Ananda, sentient beings who wish to see Amitayus while in this world should awaken aspiration for the highest Enlightenment, do meritorious deeds, and aspire to be born in his land."

(2. The middle grade)

[24] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The middle grade of aspirants are the devas and humans in the worlds of the ten quarters who sincerely desire to be born in that land. Although unable to become monks and cultivate much merit, they awaken aspiration for the highest Enlightenment, single-mindedly think on Amitayus, perform some good deeds, observe the precepts of abstinence, build stupas, donate Buddhist statues, give alms to mendicants, hang banners, light candles, scatter flowers, burn incense, and so forth. They transfer the merit of those practices to his land, aspiring to be born there. When they are about to die, Amitayus will manifest his transformed body, which is fully possessed of the same radiance and physical characteristics and marks as those of the real Buddha, and make it appear before them, together with a host of sages. Then they will follow this transformed Buddha and be born in the Pure Land, where they will dwell in the Stage of Non-retrogression. Their virtue and wisdom will be next to those of the higher grade of aspirants."

(3. The lower grade)

[25] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The lower grade of aspirants are the devas and humans in the worlds of the ten quarters who sincerely desire to be born in that land. Although unable to do many meritorious deeds, they awaken aspiration for the highest Enlightenment and single-mindedly concentrate on Amitayus even ten times, desiring birth in his land. When they hear the profound Dharma, they joyfully accept it and do not entertain any doubt; and so, remembering the Buddha even once, they sincerely aspire to be born in that land. When they are about to die, they will see the Buddha in a dream. Those aspirants, too, will be born in the Pure Land. Their merit and wisdom will be next to those of the middle grade of aspirants."

Bodhisattvas' visit to the Pure Land from other lands

[26] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The majestic virtue of Amitayus is boundless. All the innumerable, uncountable and inconceivable Buddhas, Tathagatas, in the worlds of the ten quarters praise him. Innumerable and uncountable bodhisattvas in the Buddha-lands of the eastern quarter, as numerous as the sands of the River Ganges, all without exception, visit Amitayus in order to worship and make offerings to him and to the assembly of bodhisattvas and shravakas. Having heard the teaching, they expound it to lead people into the Path of the Buddha. As in the eastern quarter, so it is in the southern, western and northern, as well as in the four intermediate quarters, above and below."

Verses on Bodhisattvas' visit

[27] Then the World-Honored One spoke the following verses:

In the eastern quarter there are Buddha-lands,
As numerous as the sands of the River Ganges;
Bodhisattvas dwelling in those lands
Go to pay homage to Amitayus, the Enlightened One.

So it is in the southern, western, and northern quarters,
The intermediate quarters, above and below;
Bodhisattvas dwelling in those lands
Go to pay homage to Amitayus, the Enlightened One.

All those bodhisattvas, taking with them
Exquisite heavenly flowers,
Precious incense and priceless robes,
Make offerings to Amitayus, the Enlightened One.

Playing heavenly music in concert,
Producing harmonious and delicate sounds,
They praise the Most Honored One with hymns
And make offerings to Amitayus, the Enlightened One:

'You have perfected supernatural powers and wisdom,
With which you freely enter the gates of the profound Dharma;
You also possess stocks of merit and virtue
And unparalleled supreme knowledge.

Illumining the world with the sun of wisdom,
You disperse the clouds of birth-and-death.'
Having reverently walked round him three times,
They pay homage to the Unsurpassed One.

Having seen the glorious Pure Land,
Wonderfully resplendent, [273a]
They are led to awaken supernal aspiration
And wish their lands to be like his.

Then Amitayus, the Enlightened One,
Changes his countenance and smiles;
From his mouth come forth innumerable rays of light,
Which illuminate the worlds in the ten quarters.

These rays of light return, encircle his body
Three times, and enter the crown of his head.
All devas and humans are delighted to see this
And are filled with great joy.

Avalokiteshvara, the Exalted Being, having respectfully arranged
His clothes and bowed his head,
Asked the Buddha, 'Why are you smiling?
Reverently I enquire. Please tell me why.'

The Buddha's majestic voice was like thunder,
Producing wonderful sounds in eight qualities of voice;
'Because I am about to give predictions to the bodhisattvas.
I now explain to you. Listen carefully!

I am fully aware of the vows of the bodhisattvas
Who come from the ten quarters;
They seek to glorify their pure lands.
After receiving my predictions, they will become Buddhas.

While realizing that all dharmas are like a dream,
An illusion or an echo,
They will fulfill their excellent vows
And surely establish pure lands such as this.

Knowing that dharmas are like a flash of lightning or a shadow,
They will pursue the Bodhisattva Path to its end
And amass a stock of merit. After receiving
My predictions, they will become Buddhas.

While thoroughly knowing that the nature of all dharmas
Is empty and without substance,
They will single-mindedly seek to produce their pure lands
And will surely establish lands such as this.'

The Buddhas tell the bodhisattvas to go and pay homage
To the Buddha of the Land of Peace and Provision.
'Listen to his teaching, joyfully receive and practice it,
And then quickly reach the Realm of Purity.

When you go to his glorious Pure Land,
You will instantly acquire supernatural powers.
Having, without fail, received predictions from Amitayus,
You will attain perfect Enlightenment.

By the power of that Buddha's Original Vows,
All who hear his Name and desire birth,
Will, without exception, be born in his land
And effortlessly enter the Stage of Non-retrogression.

Bodhisattvas, if you make vows
That your lands will be like this,
While aspiring to save all beings everywhere,
Your name will be renowned throughout the ten quarters.

In order to serve millions of Tathagatas,
You can assume various forms and fly to those lands;
After worshipping them with joyful hearts,
You will return to the Land of Peace and Provision.'

Without a stock of goodness from past lives,
One cannot hear this sutra;
But those who have strictly observed the precepts
Can hear the right Dharma. [273b]

One who has met a World-Honored One in the past
Can accept this teaching.
Such a person respectfully worships, hears
And upholds it, and rejoices so greatly as to dance.

Arrogant, corrupt and indolent people
Cannot readily accept this teaching.
But those who have met Buddhas in their past lives
Rejoice to hear it.

Neither shravakas nor bodhisattvas are able to know
The Sage's Mind exhaustively;
They are like those who are born blind
And yet wish to guide others.

The ocean of the Tathagata's wisdom
Is deep, vast and boundless.
Even sages of the Hinayana cannot fathom it;
Only the Buddha clearly knows it.

Let us suppose that all human beings,
Without exception, have attained Enlightenment
And, with pure wisdom, realized original emptiness.
Even if they pondered on the Buddha's wisdom for myriads of kalpas,

And expounded it with the utmost effort all through their lives,
They would not come to exhaustive knowledge of it.
The Buddha's wisdom is thus limitless
And pure to its depths.

To obtain human life is difficult in the extreme;
To meet a Buddha in this world is also difficult;
It is difficult, too, for a man to attain faith and wisdom.
Once you have heard the Dharma, strive to reach its heart.

If you have heard the Dharma and do not forget it,
But adore and revere it with great joy,
You are my good friend. For this reason,
You should awaken aspiration for Enlightenment.

Even if the whole world is on fire,
Be sure to pass through it to hear the Dharma;
Then you will surely attain the Buddha's Enlightenment.
And everywhere deliver beings from the river of birth-and-death.

Bodhisattvas in the Pure Land

[28] The Buddha said to Ananda, "All the bodhisattvas in the land of Amitayus will ultimately attain the Stage of Becoming a Buddha After One More Life. Excepted are those who have made original vows for the sake of sentient beings, resolving to cultivate the merit of realizing their great vows to save all sentient beings. Ananda, each shravaka in the Buddha-land of Amitayus emits light for one fathom around his body. The light of a bodhisattva shines a hundred yojanas. There are two bodhisattvas who are the most dignified; their majestic light shines everywhere in the universe of a thousand million worlds."

Ananda asked, "What are the names of those two bodhisattvas?"

The Buddha replied, "One is called Avalokiteshvara and the other, Mahasthamaprapta. They had both performed Bodhisattva practices in this world, and, at the end of their lives, were born by transformation in that Buddha-land. Ananda, the sentient beings born there all fully possess the thirty-two physical characteristics of a Great Man as well as perfect wisdom, with which they penetrate deeply into the nature of all dharmas and reach their subtle essence. Their supernatural powers know no obstruction, and their physical senses are sharp and clear. The bodhisattvas of lesser capacities attain two insights. Those with superior capacities attain innumerable [merits by the] insights into the non-arising of all dharmas. Those bodhisattvas will not be subject to rebirth in evil realms before they become Buddhas. Excepted are those who seek birth in the worlds of other quarters during the turbulent period of the five defilements, manifesting their forms in the likeness of the beings there, as in this world. They can freely exercise supernatural powers and always remember their past lives."

The Buddha said to Ananda, "By the Buddha's power, bodhisattvas of that land go to innumerable worlds of the ten quarters, in as short a time as it takes to eat a meal, in order to pay homage and make offerings to the Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones. If those bodhisattvas so wish, uncountable and innumerable offerings, such as flowers, incense, music, silken canopies and banners, spontaneously appear before them as soon as they are imagined. They are rare and marvelous, unlike anything in this world. They are, accordingly, offered to the assemblies of Buddhas, bodhisattvas and shravakas. The flowers remain in the sky and gather into canopies. Their brilliance is dazzling and their fragrance pervades everywhere. The flower-canopies range in size, from those of four hundred li in circumference up to those large enough to cover the universe of a thousand million worlds. As new flower-canopies appear, old ones disappear.  These bodhisattvas all rejoice together, and, while poised in mid-air, play heavenly music and praise the virtues of the Buddhas with hymns accompanied by wonderful sounds. They listen to the Dharma and attain immeasurable joy. After thus worshipping the Buddhas, they quickly return home to the Pure Land before their meal."

Amida's preaching and exquisite sounds produced by the trees, etc.

[29] The Buddha said to Ananda, "When Amitayus expounds the Dharma to shravakas and bodhisattvas, they all assemble in the seven-jewelled lecture-hall. There he fully expounds the teachings of the Way and proclaims the wonderful Dharma. The whole audience rejoices, comprehends, and attains Enlightenment. At that time a breeze spontaneously arises in each of the four directions and wafts over the jewelled trees, producing sounds of the pentatonic scales and causing innumerable exquisite flowers to fall like rain and scatter everywhere. Natural ways of glorification such as these are endlessly repeated. All the devas bring with them a hundred thousand flowers and pieces of aromatic wood and thousands of musical instruments to use as offerings to the Buddha and the assembly of bodhisattvas and shravakas; they scatter flowers, diffuse perfumes everywhere and play various kinds of music. They come and go in succession, giving way to each other. At such times their joy and happiness are beyond description."

Bodhisattvas' virtues

[30] The Buddha said to Ananda, "The bodhisattvas born in that Buddha-land expound the right Dharma whenever appropriate and, because they are in accord with the wisdom of enlightenment, their expositions are infallible and free of error. In regard to the myriads of things in that land, they have no thought of possession or attachment. Whether going or coming, proceeding or remaining, their hearts are unattached, their acts are in accordance with their will and are unrestricted, and they have no thought of discrimination. In them there is no idea of self or others, no idea of competition or dispute. With the heart of great compassion to benefit all living beings and with tenderness and self-control, they bear no enmity or grudge against anyone. Free of mental hindrances, they are pure in mind and without indolence. Unbiased, noble-minded, sincere and tranquil, their hearts can revere, appreciate and enjoy the Dharma.

"Having extinguished all evil passions, they are free of those tendencies which cause one to fall into evil realms. They have accomplished all the duties of a bodhisattva and are fully endowed with immeasurable virtues. Having reached deep meditation and gained supernatural powers, transcendent knowledge and wisdom, they are established in the seven practices leading to Enlightenment and are devoted to the Buddha Dharma.

"With the physical eye they see clearly, discerning objects without error; the sight of their heavenly eye reaches everywhere without limit; with the Dharma-eye they observe and know thoroughly the teachings of the Way; with the wisdom-eye they see truth and attain the Other Shore; with the Buddha-eye they completely realize the nature of dharmas; and with unhindered wisdom they expound the Dharma to others.

"Although they observe with the eye of equality that the three worlds are empty and non-existent, they strive to learn the Buddha Dharma and acquire varied eloquence in order to rid living beings of affliction caused by evil passions. Since all dharmas have arisen from Suchness, the bodhisattvas see them as they really are and know skillful means of speech that will develop good habits and destroy bad ones in living beings. They dislike secular talk, enjoying only right discourse on the Dharma.

"They cultivate roots of virtue, revere the Path of the Buddha, and know that all dharmas are completely tranquil and non-existent. Their samsaric bodies and evil passions have been extinguished together with their remaining karmic tendencies. When they hear the profound Dharma, their minds are free of doubt and fear. They are always able to cultivate great compassion which is deep and subtle, embracing everything like the sky and bearing all like the earth. Having reached the end of the Single Path, they have gone to the Other Shore. Having cut the net of doubt, wisdom arises in their minds. Within the Buddha Dharma there is nothing that they do not comprehend.

"Their wisdom is like the ocean, and their samadhi, like the king of mountains. The light of their wisdom, being brilliant and pure, outshines the sun and the moon. They are in complete possession of the pure, undefiled Dharma. They are like the Himalayas, because the brilliance of their virtues is reflected evenly and clearly. They are like the great earth, because they have no discriminative thoughts, such as pure or impure, beautiful or ugly. They are like pure water, because they wash away afflictions and defilements. They are like the king of fire, because they burn the firewood of all evil passions. They are like a great wind, because they travel throughout the worlds without hindrance. They are like the sky, because they have no attachments. They are like lotuses, because nothing in the world can defile them. They are like a great vehicle, because they carry the multitude of beings out of birth-and-death. They are like a heavy cloud, because they cause the great thunder of the Dharma to roar and awaken the unenlightened. They are like a great rain, because they cause the nectar of Dharma to fall like showers to nourish living beings. They are like the Adamantine Mountains, because demons and non-Buddhists cannot move them. They are like the king of the Brahma Heaven, because they are foremost in the performance of various good deeds. They are like the nyagrodha tree, because they afford shelter to all beings. They are like the udumbara flower, because they rarely appear in the world and are difficult to encounter. They are like the gold-winged garuda, because they subdue non-Buddhists. They are like a flock of playful birds, because they do not store things. They are like the king of bulls, because they are invincible. They are like the king of elephants, because they conquer adversaries. They are like the king of lions, because they fear nothing. They are like the vest sky, because their great compassion reaches everywhere without discrimination.

"They have destroyed envy by not being jealous of the superiority of others.  With singleness of heart they seek the Dharma tirelessly. Always desiring to expound the doctrine, they never grow weary. Striking Dharma-drums and hoisting Dharma-banners, they cause the sun of wisdom to shine forth and dissipate the darkness of ignorance. They perform the six acts of accord and respect, and always provide others with the gift of the Dharma. Strong-willed and diligent, their determination never falters. Thus they become lamps to the world and fields of supreme merit; they always become teachers and harbor no thought of discrimination, aversion, or attachment. They seek only the right Path, finding neither joy nor sorrow in other matters. They extract thorns of passion and give peace of mind to multitudes of beings. Because of their supreme wisdom, there is no one who does not revere them. "They have destroyed the hindrances of the three defilements and mastered the supernatural powers. They also possess the power of good karma from their past lives, the power of guiding others, of the will, of vowing, of employing skillful means, of continuous practice, of doing good, of meditation, of wisdom, of hearing the Dharma widely. They also possess the power of the Six Paramitas -- generosity, morality, patience, effort, meditation and wisdom -- and the power of right mindfulness, concentration, contemplation, the supernatural faculties, transcendent knowledge, and the power to tame and train living beings in the right way, as well as other powers.

"Fully possessed of all the physical characteristics and marks, virtues, and eloquence, they have no equals. They revere and worship innumerable Buddhas and are, in turn, always praised by them. They have completed the bodhisattva's course of Paramitas and practiced the samadhis of emptiness, non-form and non-desire, the samadhi of non-arising and non-ceasing and many other samadhis; they have gone far beyond the stages of shravakas and pratyekabuddhas.

"Ananda, bodhisattvas of that land have innumerable virtues such as these, of which I have given you only an outline. If I were to expound them in full detail, a thousand million kalpas would not be long enough to do so."

Three kinds of evil passions and their consequences

[31] The Buddha said to the Bodhisattva Maitreya and to devas and humans, "The virtue and wisdom of shravakas and bodhisattvas in the land of Amitayus are indescribable. That land is sublime, blissful, serene and pure. Why do you not diligently practice good, reflect on the naturalness of the Way and realize that it is above all discriminations and is boundlessly pervasive? You should each make a great effort to attain it. Strive to escape from Samsara and be born in the Land of Peace and Provision. Then, the causes of the five evil realms having been destroyed, they will naturally cease to be, and so you will progress unhindered in your pursuit of the Way. The Pure Land is easy to reach, but very few actually go there. It rejects nobody, but naturally and unfailingly attracts beings. Why do you not abandon worldly matters and strive to enter the Way? If you do, you will obtain an infinitely long life and one of limitless bliss.

"People of the world, being weak in virtue, engage in strife over matters which are not urgent. In the midst of abject wickedness and extreme afflictions they painstakingly toil for their living. Whether noble or corrupt, rich or poor, young or old, male or female, all people worry about wealth and property. In this there is no difference between the rich and the poor; both have their anxieties. Groaning in dejection and sorrow, they pile up thoughts of anguish or, [274c] driven by inner urges, they run wildly in all directions and they have no time for peace and rest.

"For example, if they own fields, they are concerned about them. If they have houses, they worry about them. They are also anxious about their six kinds of domestic animals, such as cows and horses, about their male and female servants, money, wealth, clothes, food and furnishings. With deepening troubles they sigh repeatedly, and anxiety increasingly torments and terrifies them. Sudden misfortune may befall them: all their possessions may be destroyed by fire, swept away by floods, plundered by robbers, or seized by adversaries or creditors. Then gnawing grief afflicts them and incessantly troubles their hearts. Anger seizes their minds, keeps them in constant agitation, increasingly tightens its grip, hardens their hearts and never leaves them.

"When their lives end in such agonizing conditions, they must leave everybody and everything behind. Even nobles and men of wealth have these worries. With much anxiety and fear, they endure such tribulations. Breaking out in cold sweats or fevers, they suffer unremitting pain.

"The poor and the underprivileged are constantly destitute. If, for example, they have no fields, they are unhappy and want them. If they have no houses, they are unhappy and want them. If they have none of the six kinds of domestic animals, such as cows and horses, or if they have no male and female servants, or lack money, wealth, clothes, food, or furnishings, they are unhappy and want those as well. If they possess some of them, others may be lacking. If they have this, they do not have that, and so they wish to possess all. But, even if by some chance they come to possess everything, it will soon be destroyed or lost. Then, dejected and sorrowful, they strive to obtain such things again, but it may be impossible. Brooding over this is to no avail. Exhausted in mind and body, they become restless in all their doings, and anxieties follow on their heels. Such are the troubles they must endure. Breaking out in cold sweats or fevers, they suffer unremitting pain. Such conditions may result in the sudden end of their lives or an early death. Since they have not done any good in particular, nor followed the Way, nor acted virtuously, when they die, they will depart alone to an inferior world. Although they are destined to different states of existence, none of them understands the law of karma that sends them there.

"People of the world, parents and children, brothers and sisters, husbands and wives, and other family members and kinsmen, should respect and love each other, refraining from hatred and envy. They should share things with others, and not be greedy and miserly, always speak friendly words with a pleasing smile, and not hurt each other.

"If one disagrees with others and grows angry, however small one's grudge and enmity may be in this life, these will increase in the life to come until they grow into a mass of hostility. For, if people are engaged in tormenting and harming each other in this life, such conflict may not immediately end in mutual destruction. But persistent bitterness and raging fury are impressed upon the mind, and thus naturally leave indelible marks on consciousness, so that those involved will be reborn about the same time to take revenge on each other.

"Further, in the midst of worldly desires and attachments one comes and goes alone, is born alone and dies alone. After death, one goes to a painful or to a pleasant state of existence. Each receives his karmic consequences and nobody else can take his place. In accordance with different acts of good and evil, people are destined to realms of bliss or suffering. Unalterably bound by their karma, they depart for those realms all alone. Having reached the other world, they cannot see each other. The law of good and evil naturally pursues them, and wherever they may be reborn, distance and darkness always separate them. Since their paths of karma are different, it is impossible to tell the time of their reunion, and so difficult to meet again. Can they ever see each other once more?

"Why do they not abandon all worldly involvements and strive, while they are strong and healthy, to pursue the good and diligently seek deliverance from Samsara? If they do, they will be able to attain infinite life. Why do they not seek the Way? What is there in this world that should be longed for? What pleasure is there that ought to be sought after?

"Thus people of the world do not believe in pursuing good and receiving reward or in practicing the Way and attaining Enlightenment; neither do they believe in transmigration and retribution for evil acts or reward for good ones, such as obtaining merit by helping others. Believing that these do not exist, they totally reject such a view.

"Further, by so doing, they cling to their own views more tenaciously. Later generations learn from previous ones to act likewise. Fathers, perpetuating their wrong views, pass them on to their children. Since parents and grandparents from the beginning did not do good deeds, were ignorant of the Way, committed foolish acts, and were benighted, insensitive and callous, their descendants are now unable to realize the truth of birth-and-death and the law of karma. There is no one to tell them about this. Nobody seeks to know the cause of fortune and misfortune, happiness and misery, although these states result from such acts.

"The reality of birth-and-death is such that the sorrow of parting is mutually felt by all generations. A father cries over the death of his children; children cry over the death of their father. Brothers, sisters, husbands and wives mourn each other's death. According to the basic law of impermanence, whether death will occur in order of seniority or in the reverse is unpredictable. All things must pass. Nothing stays forever. Few believe this, even if someone teaches and exhorts them. And so the stream of birth-and-death continues everlastingly.

"Because they are stupid and callous, such people do not accept the teachings of the Buddha; they lack forethought, and only wish to satisfy their own desires. They are deluded by their passionate attachments, unaware of the Way, misguided and trapped by anger and enmity, and intent on gaining wealth and gratifying their carnal desires like wolves. And so, unable to follow the Way, they are again subject to suffering in evil realms in an endless cycle of birth-and-death. How miserable and pitiable this is!

"In the same family, when one of the parents, children, brothers, sisters, husband or wife dies, those surviving mourn over the loss, and their attachment to the deceased persists. Deep sorrow fills their hearts and, grief-stricken, they mournfully think of the departed. Days pass and years go by, but their distress goes on. Even if someone teaches them the Way, their minds are not awakened. Brooding over fond memories of the dead, they cannot rid themselves of attachment. Being ignorant, inert, and illusion-bound, they are unable to think deeply, to keep their self-composure, to practice the Way with diligence, and to dissociate themselves from worldly matters. As they wander here and there, they come to their end and die before entering on the Way. Then what can be done for them?

"Because they are spiritually defiled, deeply troubled and confused, people indulge their passions. Hence, many are ignorant of the Way, and few realize it. Everyone is restlessly busy, having nothing upon which to rely. Whether moral or corrupt, of high or low rank, rich or poor, noble or base, all are preoccupied with their own work. They entertain venomous thoughts, creating a widespread and dismal atmosphere of malevolence. Subversive activities are planned, contrary to the universal law and the wishes of the people.

"Injustice and vice inevitably follow and are allowed to run their course unchecked until evil karma accumulates to the limit. Before they expect their lives to end, people meet sudden death and fall into evil realms, where they will suffer excruciating torments for many lives. [275b] They will not be able to escape for many thousands of kotis of kalpas. How indescribably painful! How pitiable that is!"

Shakyamuni's encouragement to do good

[32] The Buddha said to the Bodhisattva Maitreya and to devas and humans, "I have told you the truth about people of the world. Such being their mode of life, they are unable to enter on the Way. Therefore, you should think deeply and try to avoid various evil acts; choose the good and diligently practice it. A life of addiction to desires or a life of pomp and vainglory cannot last long. All must part; there is nothing you can truly enjoy. Since you have encountered a Buddha in this world, you should assiduously practice the Way. Anyone who sincerely desires birth in the Land of Peace and Bliss is able to attain purity of wisdom and supremacy in virtue. You should not follow the urges of passions, break the precepts, or fall behind others in the practice of the Way. If you have doubts and are not clear about my teaching, ask me, the Buddha, about anything and I shall explain it to you."

The Bodhisattva Maitreya prostrated himself on the ground and said, "Your majestic glory, O Buddha, is awe-inspiring, and your exposition is most pleasing to me. Having heard your teaching, I feel deeply that people of the world are just as you have described. Your compassionate revelation of the Great Way has opened our eyes and ears, awakening us to emancipation. Those who have heard your teachings are all filled with joy. Devas, humans and lesser beings, including even those that crawl, have all been blessed by your compassionate guidance and have thereby attained deliverance from suffering and affliction.

"The Buddha's admonition is indeed profound and appropriate, and his wisdom clearly surveys things in the eight quarters, above and below, penetrating all in the past, present and future. Our emancipation in the present life is entirely due to the Buddha's perseverance and painstaking efforts in his former lives when he was seeking the Way. His benevolence covers the whole world, and the extent of his merit is majestic and glorious. His light penetrates to the utmost ends of space and guides people to Nirvana. He reveals the sutras, destroys wrong views and subdues demons. Thus his influence extends boundlessly in the ten quarters. The Buddha is the King of the Dharma; his virtue surpasses that of all the sages. He is the Teacher of all devas and humans and enables them to enter on the Way according to their wishes. Having been able to meet you, O Buddha, and also to hear the Name of Amitayus, we have all attained joy and illumination."

Shakyamuni's admonition against evil acts

[33] The Buddha said to Maitreya, "What you say is true. Those who adore and revere a Buddha attain great merit. Buddhas very rarely appear in the world. Having become a Buddha in this life, I have taught the Dharma, expounded teachings of the Way, cleared people's doubts, eradicated the causes of lust and desire, and blocked the source of all evils. Visiting various places in the three worlds, I encounter no obstructions. The wisdom disclosed in the scriptures provides for all ways of life. It keeps essential principles together and clearly reveals the truth. I have explained the reality of the five realms, thereby freeing those who have not yet attained deliverance and distinguishing between the paths of Samsara and Nirvana. 

"Maitreya, you should know that you have, for innumerable kalpas, been perfecting bodhisattva practices to save sentient beings. Incalculable indeed is the number of beings who under your guidance have attained the Way and reached Nirvana. From time immemorial, you and all the devas and humans in the ten quarters and the four groups of followers have been floundering in the five realms of Samsara, undergoing indescribable troubles and afflictions. Until you were born in this life, you, too, underwent endless cycles of birth-and-death. Now you have encountered a Buddha, listened to his expositions of the Dharma, and been able to learn about Amitayus. What pleasure and joy this is for you and for me to share. "It is time for all to seek deliverance from the pains of birth, death, old age, and sickness. Outflows of depravity and defilement are everywhere, and there is nothing in which you can find true joy. You should resolutely do worthy deeds with decorum, strive to do more good, control and purify yourselves, wash off the mind's defilements, be sincere in word and deed, and allow no contradiction between what you think and what you do. Seek your own emancipation and then turn to saving others; straightforwardly aspire to be born in the Pure Land and accumulate roots of virtue. However hard you may practice in this life, it can only be for a short while. In the life to come you will be born in the land of Amitayus and enjoy endless bliss there. Being forever in accord with the Way, you will no longer be subject to birth-and-death and be free of the afflictions caused by greed, anger and stupidity. If you wish your life to be as long as a kalpa, a hundred kalpas, or ten million kalpas, it will be just as you please. You will dwell in effortless spontaneity and attain Nirvana. You should each diligently seek to realize your aspiration. Do not entertain any doubt or give up your endeavor, lest as a result of that fault you should be born into the seven-jewelled palace in the border region of the Pure Land and be subject to various disadvantages for five hundred years."

Maitreya said to the Buddha, "Having received your considerate admonition, we will diligently practice the Way and follow your teaching. We will not allow any doubt to arise."

Admonition against five evils

[34] The Buddha said to Maitreya, "If here in this world you are upright in thought and will, and abstain from doing evil, then you will attain the utmost virtue, unsurpassed in all the lands throughout the ten quarters. Why is this so? Devas and humans in the Buddha-lands naturally do good and rarely commit evil, and so, it is easy to teach and train them. Having become a Buddha in this world, I now dwell in the midst of the five evils, the five sufferings, and the five burnings. This is extremely painful for me. I will teach multitudes of beings, making them abandon the five evils, avoid the five sufferings, and escape from the five burnings. I will train their minds and lead them to practice the five good deeds, so that they may acquire merit and virtue and attain emancipation, long life, and Nirvana."

"The Buddha continued, What are the five evils? What are the five sufferings? What are the five burnings? What is the way to extinguish the five evils and lead people to practice the five good deeds, so that they may acquire merit and virtue and attain emancipation, long life, and Nirvana?"

1) first evil

[35] The Buddha said, "The first evil is this. Devas, humans and lesser beings, including even those that crawl, are bent on doing evil. There is no being that is not. The strong subdue the weak; all inflict serious injuries and kill each other, all devour their prey. Not knowing how to do good, they commit evil and do outrageous and unruly deeds. Later, they receive retribution, [276a] it is natural that they should be destined to evil realms. Demigods keep records of offenders' acts and make sure that they are punished. That is why some are poor and destitute, corrupt, beggarly, lonely, deaf, dumb, blind, stupid, wicked, physically handicapped, deranged, or subnormal. But others are honorable, noble, wealthy, intelligent, or clever. This is the result of good and meritorious acts of benevolence and the performance of their duties to their parents in past lives.

"In this world prisons are set up by the law, and those who are unafraid of them and commit offenses are sent there for punishment. However desperately they may wish to escape, it is impossible to do so. Such is retribution in this world, but in the lives to come, punishment is longer and more severe for such evildoers. The suffering of transmigration through dark and dismal realms is comparable to the severest and most painful punishment ever enforced by law.

"Thus, through the natural working of karma, they undergo immeasurable suffering in the three evil realms. In successive transmigrations they are reborn into different forms; their life-spans are sometimes long and sometimes short. Their transient selves, vital energy and consciousness transmigrate through the natural working of karma. Although each individual is reborn alone, those bound by common karma come to be born together and take revenge upon each other. So this condition persists endlessly and, until the effect of their evil karma is exhausted, there is no possibility of avoiding their enemies. Floundering in Samsara, they have no chance of escape or of attaining emancipation. The pain that they must undergo is indescribable. Since this law naturally obtains everywhere between heaven and earth, even if good or evil acts do not immediately bring about reward or retribution, they will certainly result sooner or later. This I call the first great evil, the first suffering, and the first burning. Those afflictions are such that they are comparable to a huge fire burning people alive.

"If in the midst of this, one controls one's thoughts with single-mindedness, does worthy deeds with proper demeanor, commits no evil, and performs only good, then with the merit and virtue acquired one reaches emancipation and is able to escape from this world, be reborn in heavenly realms, and finally reach Nirvana. This is the first great good."

2) second evil

[36] The Buddha continued, "The second evil is that people of the world --parents, children, brothers and sisters, members of a family, husbands and wives -- all lack moral principles, break laws, conduct themselves arrogantly, commit licentious and unruly acts, pursue their own pleasures, enjoy themselves as they will, and deceive each other. What they think contradicts what they say; they speak without sincerity, flatter others with deceitful intention, fawn upon others with artful words, envy the reputation of sages, abuse the virtuous, and entrap people by dishonest means.

"Masters are unwise in appointing retainers, who, exploiting the situation, seek every opportunity for trickery and deceit. Rulers, being unrighteous, are deceived by ministers and foolishly remove loyal and faithful subjects. This is contrary to the will of Heaven. Ministers betray their rulers; children deceive their parents; brothers, sisters, husbands, wives, kinsmen and friends deceive each other. They harbor greed, anger, and stupidity, and, desiring many possessions, seek their own advantage. All people are the same at heart, whether they are men of high and honorable positions or of lower and despised classes. They bring their homes and themselves to ruin and recklessly destroy their kindred. Although there are family members, friends, villagers, townspeople, ignorant [276b] and vulgar groups working together, all seek to gain their own profit, thereby incurring the anger and enmity of others. When people grow rich, they become miserly and uncharitable. Greedily attached to their wealth, they toil with mind and body to retain it. When their end comes, they find nothing to rely on. Ultimately they are born and depart alone, with nobody to accompany them. Bliss or misery resulting from good or evil acts follows them in their future lives. Thus they are reborn in pleasant or painful states. Even if they later show regret, what good will that do?

"People of the world, being dark-hearted and lacking insight, hate and abuse good people and show them no respect. They are attached to wrongdoing and willfully commit unlawful acts. They always covet the wealth of others and harbor intentions of stealing. After spending and squandering what they have robbed from others, they seek to regain it. Because of their own hidden motives and dishonesty, they slyly study the reactions shown on the faces of others. Since they are unable to think far ahead, when things go wrong, they become despondent with chagrin.

"In this world there are prisons established by the law where offenders are sent to receive punishment according to their offenses. In their previous lives they neither believed in the Way nor cultivated roots of virtue. In this life, too, if they commit evil, demigods know and keep records of their acts; when they die, they fall into evil realms. Thus, because of the natural working of karma, there are the three evil realms and innumerable sufferings through which evildoers must pass, life after life, for many kalpas, with no end in sight. It is indeed difficult for them to attain release. The pain they must undergo is indescribable. This is called the second great evil, the second suffering, and the second burning. The afflictions are such that they are comparable to a huge fire burning people alive.

"If in the midst of this one controls one's thoughts with single-mindedness, does worthy deeds with proper demeanor, commits no evil, and performs only good, then with the merit and virtue acquired one reaches emancipation and is able to escape from this world, be reborn in heavenly realms and finally reach Nirvana. This is the second great good."

3) the third evil

[37] The Buddha continued, "The third evil is this. People of the world live together, inhabiting this realm between heaven and earth, with a limited life-span. On the one hand, among the higher levels there are wise, rich, honorable, noble, and wealthy people. On the other hand, among the lower levels there are people who are poor, debased, crude and foolish. Besides, there are evildoers who always harbor vicious thoughts and think only of self-gratification; they are full of worries, sunk in lust and attachment, are restless in their daily lives, greedy and miserly, and desirous of what they have no right to possess. They gloat over fair-skinned women, behave licentiously and commit obscene acts with them, hate their own wives, and secretly frequent brothels. Consequently, after squandering all their resources, they begin to break the law. They form bands, start riots, engage in fighting, unlawfully attack and kill people and plunder property.

"Some have evil designs on the possessions of others. Without working at their own occupations, they acquire things through theft. Driven by desire, they commit further offenses. Feverishly agitated, they intimidate and rob people to support their own wives and children with the goods thus acquired. Obeying only the dictates of their passions, they become addicted to wanton pleasures. They also disregard seniority in kinship, causing sorrow and anguish to other family members and relatives; furthermore, they take no account of the laws of the State.

"But such evils are known to others and also to demons. The Sun and the Moon recognize them and demigods [276c] keep records of their doings. Thus, because of the natural working of karma, there are three evil realms and innumerable sufferings through which evildoers must pass, life after life, for many kalpas, with no end in sight. It is indeed difficult for them to gain release. The pain they must undergo is indescribable. This is called the third great evil, the third suffering, and the third burning. The afflictions are such that they are comparable to a huge fire burning people alive.

"If in the midst of this one controls one's thoughts with single-mindedness, does worthy deeds with proper demeanor, commits no evil, and performs only good, then with the merit and virtue acquired one reaches emancipation and is able to escape from this world, be reborn in heavenly realms and finally reach Nirvana. This is the third great good."

4) the fourth evil

[38] The Buddha continued, "The fourth evil is this. People of the world do not think of doing good. They incite each other to commit various kinds of evil -- uttering harsh and abusive words, telling lies, and engaging in idle talk. They slander others and cause contention. They hate and envy good men and ruin the wise, while they rejoice in watching this behind the scenes. They are neglectful of their parents, make light of their teachers and elders, fail to win the trust of their friends, and lack sincerity. Holding themselves in high esteem, they think that they are virtuous, but act waywardly in an overbearing manner and despise others. Unaware of their own evil, they never feel ashamed of themselves. Boastful of their physical strength, they demand respect and fear from others. Taking no heed of Heaven, Earth, demigods, or the Sun and the Moon, they disdain to do any good. So they are difficult to train and convert. Holding themselves in high esteem, they demand their own way. Arrogant and afraid of nothing, they always assume a haughty attitude. But demigods keep record of their evils. Perhaps there was some meritorious act in their past lives, and they can count on the effect of that small amount of good. But, since they commit evil again in this life, their stock of merit is soon exhausted; good divinities forsake them, leaving them alone and with no one on whom to depend. When their lives end, all their evil recoils upon them and forces them, through the natural working of karma, to descend to the evil realms. Again, as the exact record of their deeds in the hands of the demigods dictates, their karmic transgressions and offenses condemn them to hellish realm. Retribution for evil comes about naturally and nothing can stop it. They must go into the red-hot cauldrons, where their bodies are melted down with the utmost torment and anguish. Even if at that time they repent of their evil deeds, what good will that do? The Way of Heaven takes its inevitable course without mistake.

"Thus, because of the natural working of karma, there are the three evil realms and innumerable kinds of suffering through which evildoers must pass, life after life, for many kalpas, with no end in sight. It is indeed difficult for them to gain release, and the pain they must undergo is indescribable. This is called the fourth great evil, the fourth suffering, and the fourth burning. The afflictions are such that they are comparable to a huge fire burning people alive.

"If, in the midst of this, one controls one's thoughts with single-mindedness, does worthy deeds with proper demeanor, commits no evil, and performs only good, then with the merit and virtue acquired one reaches emancipation and is able to escape from this world, be reborn in heavenly realms, and finally reach Nirvana. This is the fourth great good."

5) the fifth evil

[39] The Buddha continued, "The fifth evil is this. People of the world are indecisive and slothful, reluctant to do good, lacking in self-discipline and not working hard at their occupations, so their families and dependents are left to suffer from hunger and cold. When reproached by their parents, they retort angrily with scornful looks. With such conflicts they are far from peaceful; they can be as violent and frenzied as enemies confronting each other, and, as a result, parents wish that they had no children.

"In dealing with others, they are licentious and wayward, causing trouble and annoyance to many. Even when they are morally obliged to others, they neglect their duties and have no intention of repaying their indebtedness. Destitute and driven to the most desperate ends, they have no way of regaining their wealth. Although eager to obtain much profit and appropriate the riches of others, they waste their money on wanton pleasures. As this becomes a habit, they grow accustomed to acquiring property illegally and to spending their ill-gained profits on personal luxuries; indulging in wine and sumptuous food, they eat and drink to excess. Profligate and contentious as they are, they engage in foolish quarrels. Unable to understand others, they forcibly impose their will upon them. "When they come upon people who are good, they hate and abuse them. Lacking ethics and decorum, they do not reflect on their conduct, and so are presumptuous and insistent, refusing to take the advice and admonitions of others. They are unconcerned if their kinsmen, from the closest to the sixth blood-relative, have no means of livelihood. They disregard their parents' benevolence, and do not fulfill obligations to their teachers and friends. They think only of doing evil; their mouths continuously speak malice; and with their bodies, they are forever committing evil. In their whole lives they have not done even one good deed.

"Furthermore, they do not believe in the ancient sages, nor the Buddhist teachings, nor the path of practice leading to emancipation. Neither do they believe that after death one is reborn into another state of existence, that good deeds bring about good rewards, or that evil acts bring about evil consequences. They plot to murder an arhat, to cause disruption in the Sangha, and even think of killing their parents, brothers, sisters or other relatives. For this reason, even their kinsmen, from the closest to the sixth blood-relative, hate them so much as to wish them dead.

"Such people of the world are all of the same mind. They are foolish and ignorant, lacking the wisdom to know whence they have come into life nor whither they are going after death. Neither humane toward others nor obedient to their elders, they revel against the whole world. Nevertheless, they expect good fortune and seek long lives, only to meet death in the end. Even if someone compassionately admonishes them, trying to lead them to thoughts of goodness, and teaches them that naturally there are good and evil realms of Samsara, they will not believe him. However hard one may try to persuade them, it is useless. Their minds are closed, and they refuse to listen to others or understand their teachings. When their lives are about to end, fear and revulsion arise in turn. Not having previously done any good, they are filled with remorse when they come to their end. But what good will that do then?

"Between heaven and earth, the five realms are clearly distinguishable. They are vast and deep, extending boundlessly. In return for good or evil deeds, bliss or misery ensues. The result of one's karma must be borne by oneself alone and no one else can take one's place. This is the natural law. Misfortune follows evil deeds as their retribution, which is impossible to avoid. Good people do good deeds, and so enjoy pleasure after pleasure and proceed from light to greater light. Evildoers commit crimes, and so suffer pain after pain and wander from darkness to deeper darkness. No one, except the Buddha, knows this completely. Even though someone admonishes and teaches them, very few believe; and so the cycles of birth-and-death never cease and the evil paths continue endlessly. [277b] The karmic consequences for such worldly people are beyond description in detail.

"Thus, because of the natural working of karma, there are innumerable kinds of suffering in the three evil realms through which evil beings must pass, life after life, for many kalpas, with no end in sight. It is indeed difficult for them to gain release, and the pain they must undergo is indescribable. This is called the fifth great evil, the fifth suffering, and the fifth burning. The afflictions are such that they are comparable to a huge fire burning people alive.

"If in the midst of this, one controls one's thoughts with single-mindedness, does worthy deeds with proper demeanor, mindfully recollects, harmonizes words and deeds, acts with sincerity, utters true words, speaks from the heart, commits no evil, and performs only good, then with the merit and virtue acquired one reaches emancipation and is able to escape from this world, be reborn in heavenly realms, and finally reach Nirvana. This is the fifth great good."

Further admonition by the Buddha

[40] The Buddha said to Maitreya, "I shall explain further. Such are the afflictions of the five evils in this world. The five sufferings and the five burnings continue to arise from them. People commit nothing but evil and fail to cultivate roots of virtue, and so it is natural that they all go to evil realms. Even in this life they suffer from incurable illnesses. Longing for death, they cannot die; craving for life, they cannot live. Thus they are an example to others of what retribution for evil acts is like. After death, driven by their karma, they fall into the three evil realms, where they suffer countless tortures and are themselves consigned to the flames.

"After a long time they are reborn again in this world, only to foment hatred against each other. At first hatred is slight but finally develops into a major evil. All this is because of their greedy attachment to wealth and sensuous pleasures and of their refusal to share with others. Further, wayward thoughts arise from the desires born of stupidity. Their bondage to evil passions will never be severed. In the pursuit of selfish gain, there is no chance for them to reflect on their evils and turn to good. When wealthy and prosperous, they are happy and do not learn to be modest and virtuous. Consequently, their pomp and power are short-lived; when these are exhausted, they must undergo further afflictions. Their sufferings are bound to increase in time to come.

"The law of karma operates like a net stretched everywhere; in its meshes, it inevitably catches all offenders. The net woven of large and small ropes covers the whole world, from top to bottom, and those caught in it feel utterly helpless and tremble in fear. This net has been in existence from of old. How painful and heart-rending!"

The Buddha said to Maitreya, "People of this world are as I have described. All the Buddhas pity them and with divine powers destroy their evils and lead them all to goodness. If you give up wrong views, hold fast to the scriptures and the precepts, and practice the Way without committing any fault, then you will finally be able to attain the path to emancipation and Nirvana."

The Buddha continued, "You and other devas and humans of the present and people of future generations, having received the Buddha's teachings, should reflect upon them and, while following them, should remain upright in thought and do virtuous deeds. Rulers should abide by morality, reign with beneficence and decree that everyone should maintain proper conduct, revere the sages, respect men of virtue, be benevolent and kind to others, and take care not to disregard the Buddha's teachings and admonitions. All should seek emancipation, cut the roots of Samsara and its various evils, and so aspire to escape from the paths of immeasurable sorrow, fear [277c] and pain in the three evil realms.

"In this world, you should extensively plant roots of virtue, be benevolent, give generously, abstain from breaking the precepts, be patient and diligent, teach people with sincerity and wisdom, do virtuous deeds, and practice good. If you strictly observe the precepts of abstinence with upright thought and mindfulness even for a day and a night, the merit acquired will surpass that of practicing good in the land of Amitayus for a hundred years. The reason is that in that Buddha-land of effortless spontaneity all the inhabitants do good without committing even a hair's breadth of evil. If in this world you do good for ten days and nights, the merit acquired will surpass that of practicing good in the Buddha-land of other quarters for a thousand years. The reason is that in the Buddha-land of other quarters many practice good and very few commit evil. They are lands where everything is naturally provided as a result of one's merit and virtue, and so no evil is done. But in this world much evil is committed, and few are provided for naturally; people must work hard to get what they want. Since they intend to deceive each other, their minds are troubled, their bodies exhausted, and they drink bitterness and eat hardship. In this way, they are preoccupied with their toil no have time for rest.

"Out of pity for you and other devas and humans, I have taken great pains in exhorting you to do good deeds. I have given you instructions appropriate to your capacities. You have, without fail, accepted my teachings and practiced them, and so have all entered on the Way as you wished.

"Wherever the Buddha comes to stay, there is no state, town or village which is not blessed by his virtues. The whole country reposes in peace and harmony. The sun and the moon shine with pure brilliance; wind rises and rain falls at the right time. There is no calamity or epidemic, and so the country becomes wealthy, and its people enjoy peace. Soldiers and weapons become useless; and people esteem virtue, practice benevolence and diligently cultivate courteous modesty."

The Buddha continued, "My concern for you, devas and humans, is greater than the care of parents for their children. I have become a Buddha in this world, destroyed the five evils, removed the five sufferings, and extinguished the five burnings. I have countered evil with good, eradicated the suffering of birth-and-death, and enabled people to acquire the five virtues and attain the peace of unconditioned Nirvana. But after I have departed from this world, my teaching will gradually decline and people will fall prey to flattery and deceit and commit various evils, resulting in the recurrence of the five sufferings and the five burnings. As time goes on, their sufferings will intensify. As it is impossible to describe this in detail, I have given you only a brief outline.

The Buddha said to Maitreya, "You should each ponder on this well, teach and admonish each other, and be on guard against disobeying the Buddha's instruction."

The Bodhisattva Maitreya, with his palms together, said, "O Buddha, how sincere and earnest your admonition is! People of the world are just as you have described. O Tathagata, you take pity on and care for us without discrimination and seek to deliver us all from suffering. Having accepted the Buddha's repeated exhortations, I will be careful not to disobey them."

Amida and the Pure Land shown to the audience

[41] The Buddha said to Ananda, "Rise to your feet, rearrange your robes, put your palms together, and respectfully revere and worship Amitayus. Buddhas and Tathagatas in the lands of the ten quarters always praise with one accord that Buddha's virtues of non-attachment and unimpeded activity."

Ananda stood up, rearranged his robes, assumed the correct posture, faced westward, and, demonstrating his sincere reverence, joined his palms together, prostrated himself on the ground and worshipped Amitayus. Then he said [278a] to the Buddha Shakyamuni, "World-Honored One, I wish to see that Buddha, his Land of Peace and Bliss, and its hosts of bodhisattvas and shravakas."

As soon as he had said this, Amitayus emitted a great light, which illuminated all the Buddha-lands. The Encircling Adamantine Mountains, Mount Sumeru, together with large and small mountains, and everything else shone with the same (golden) color. That light was like the flood at the end of the period of cosmic change that fills the whole world, when myriads of things are submerged, and as far as the eye can see, there is nothing but a vast expanse of water. Even so was the flood of light emanating from Amitayus. All the lights of shravakas and bodhisattvas were outshone and surpassed, and only the Buddha's light remained shining bright and glorious. At that time Ananda saw the splendor and majesty of Amitayus resembling Mount Sumeru, which rises above the whole world. There was no place which was not illuminated by the light emanating from his body of glory. The four groups of followers of the Buddha in the assembly saw all this at the same time. Likewise, those of the Pure Land saw everything in this world.

Two kinds of birth in the Pure Land

[42] Then the Buddha said to Ananda and the Bodhisattva Maitreya, "Have you seen that land filled with excellent and glorious manifestations, all spontaneously produced, from the ground to the Heaven of Pure Abode,?" Ananda replied, "Yes, I have."

The Buddha asked, "Have you also heard the great voice of Amitayus expound the Dharma to all the worlds, guiding sentient beings to the Way of the Buddha?"

Ananda replied, "Yes, I have."

The Buddha further asked, "Have you also seen the inhabitants of that land move freely, riding in seven-jewelled airborne palaces as large as a hundred thousand yojanas, to worship the Buddhas of the lands in the ten quarters?"

"Yes, I have," replied Ananda.

"Have you also seen that some of the inhabitants are in the embryonic state?"

"Yes, I have. Those in the embryonic state dwell in palaces as high as a hundred yojanas or five hundred yojanas, where they spontaneously enjoy pleasures as do those in the Heaven of the Thirty-three Gods."

The cause of the two kinds of birth

[43] Then the Bodhisattva Maitreya said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, for what reason are some of the inhabitants of that land in the embryonic state and the others born by transformation?" The Buddha replied, "Maitreya, if there are sentient beings who do various meritorious deeds aspiring for birth in that land while still entertaining doubt, such beings are unable to comprehend the Buddha-wisdom, inconceivable wisdom, ineffable wisdom, boundless Mahayana wisdom, and incomparable, unequaled, and unsurpassed supreme wisdom. Although they doubt these wisdoms, they still believe in retribution for evil and reward for virtue and so cultivate a stock of merits, aspiring for birth in that land. Such beings are born in a palace, where they dwell for five hundred years without being able to behold the Buddha, hear his exposition of the Dharma, or see the hosts of bodhisattvas and shravakas. For this reason, that type of birth in the Pure Land is called 'embryonic state.'

"If there are sentient beings who with resolute faith accept these kinds of wisdom, from the Buddha's wisdom to the supreme wisdom, do meritorious deeds and sincerely transfer the merit acquired (to that land), [278b] those beings will be born by transformation spontaneously. seated with legs crossed, in the seven-jewelled lotus-flowers, and instantly attain the same glorious forms, wisdom and virtue as those of other bodhisattvas there.

Shakyamuni's encouragement of faith

[44] "Further, Maitreya, if great bodhisattvas in the Buddha-lands of other quarters desire to see Amitayus, and revere and make offerings to him and the hosts of bodhisattvas and shravakas, they will, after death, be born in the land of Amitayus. Spontaneously transformed they will be born from within the seven-jewelled lotus-flowers.

"Maitreya, you should know that those born by transformation are possessed of supreme wisdom, while those in the embryonic state lack that wisdom and must pass five hundred years without being able to see the Buddha, hear his teaching of the Dharma, see the hosts of bodhisattvas and shravakas, make offerings to the Buddha, learn the rules of conduct for bodhisattvas, or perform meritorious practices. You should know that this is because those beings harbored doubt and lacked wisdom in their previous lives."

Embryonic birth

[45] The Buddha said to Maitreya, "Let us suppose that a wheel-turning monarch has a special chamber which is adorned with seven jewels and provided with curtained couches and silken banners hanging from the ceiling. If princes have committed offense against the king, they are taken to that chamber and fettered with gold chains. There they are served with food and drink, provided with clothes, couches and cushions, flowers and incense, and can enjoy music. Being treated just like the wheel-turning monarch himself, they have no wants. Do you think that those princes would enjoy living there?"

"No they do not," replied Maitreya. "They would seek various means of approach to ask a man of power to help them escape." The Buddha said to Maitreya, "Those beings born within the lotus-buds are like that. Because of their doubt in the Buddha's wisdom, they have been born in palaces. Although they receive no punishment or ill treatment even for a single moment, they must pass five hundred years there without being able to see the Three Treasures, make offerings to the Buddha, or cultivate a stock of virtue. This is distressing to them. Though there are other pleasures, they do not enjoy living there.

"If those beings become aware of the faults committed in their former lives and deeply repent, they can, as they wish, leave and go to where Amitayus dwells. Then they can worship and make offerings to him; they can also visit innumerable and countless other Buddhas to perform various meritorious practices. Maitreya, you should know that the bodhisattvas who allow doubt to arise lose great benefits. For this reason, you should have resolute faith in the supreme wisdom of the Buddha."

Bodhisattvas' visits to the Pure Land from other Buddha-lands

[46] The Bodhisattva Maitreya said to the Buddha, "World-Honored One, how many non-retrogressive bodhisattvas are there in this world who will be born in that Buddha-land?"

The Buddha replied, "Sixty-seven kotis of non-retrogressive bodhisattvas from this world will be born there. Each of these bodhisattvas [278c] has previously made offerings to innumerable Buddhas with almost as much diligence as you did, Maitreya. Furthermore, bodhisattvas of lesser practices and those who have performed small acts of merit, whose number is beyond calculation, will all be born there."

The Buddha said to Maitreya, "Not only those bodhisattvas from this world but also those from Buddha-lands in other quarters are born there. First, in the land of the Buddha named Far-reaching Illumination there are one hundred and eighty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Second, in the land of the Buddha Jewel-storehouse there are ninety kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Third, in the land of the Buddha Immeasurable Sound there are two hundred and twenty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Fourth, in the land of the Buddha Taste of Nectar there are two hundred and fifty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Fifth, in the land of the Buddha Dragon-subduing there are fourteen kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Sixth, in the land of the Buddha Superior Power there are fourteen thousand bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Seventh, in the land of the Buddha Lion there are five hundred kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Eighth, in the land of the Buddha Undefiled Light there are eighty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Ninth, in the land of the Buddha Peak of Virtue there are sixty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Tenth, in the land of the Buddha Mountain of Excellent Virtue there are sixty kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Eleventh, in the land of the Buddha King of Men there are ten kotis of bodhisattvas, who all visit there. Twelfth, in the land of the Buddha Splendid Flower there are innumerable and incalculable bodhisattvas who are all non-retrogressive and possessed of unrivaled wisdom, who have previously made offerings to countless Buddhas and are able to learn in seven days the adamantine teachings of the Dharma that can only be attained by mahasattvas after practicing for a hundred thousand kotis of kalpas. Those bodhisattvas all visit there. Thirteenth, in the land of the Buddha Fearlessness there are seven hundred and ninety kotis of great bodhisattvas and incalculable minor bodhisattvas and bhiksus, who all visit there."

The Buddha said to Maitreya, "Not only do the bodhisattvas from those fourteen Buddha-lands visit that land, but also bodhisattvas from innumerable Buddha-lands in the ten quarters, whose number is incalculable. Even if I were to give you only the names of the Buddhas in the ten quarters and the number of the bodhisattvas and bhiksus who visit that land, enumerating them continuously day and night for a kalpa, I would not be able to complete the list. This is why I have given you only a brief description." [279a]

Shakyamuni's encouragement to accept this sutra

[47] The Buddha said to Maitreya, "If there are people who hear the Name of that Buddha, rejoice so greatly as to dance, and remember him even once, then you should know that they have gained great benefit by receiving the unsurpassed virtue. For this reason, Maitreya, even if a great fire were to fill the universe of a thousand million worlds, you should pass through it to hear this sutra, to arouse joyful faith, to uphold and chant it, and to practice in accordance with its teachings. This is because there are many bodhisattvas who wish to hear this teaching but are still unable to do so. If there are sentient beings who have heard it, they will attain the Stage of Non-retrogression for realizing the highest Enlightenment. This is why you should single-heartedly accept in faith, uphold and chant this sutra, and practice in accordance with its teaching."

The Buddha further said, "I have expounded this teaching for the sake of sentient beings and enabled you to see Amitayus and all in his land. Strive to do what you should. After I have passed into Nirvana, do not allow doubt to arise. In the future, the Buddhist scriptures and teachings will perish. But, out of pity and compassion, I will especially preserve this sutra and maintain it in the world for a hundred years more. Those beings who encounter it will attain deliverance in accord with their aspirations.

The Buddha said to Maitreya, "It is difficult to encounter and behold Tathagata when he is in this world. Difficult of access, difficult to hear are the Buddhas' teachings and scriptures. It is also difficult to hear the excellent teachings for bodhisattvas, the Paramitas. Difficult too is it to meet a good teacher, to hear the Dharma and perform the practices. But most difficult of all difficulties is to hear this sutra, have faith in it with joy and hold fast to it. Nothing is more difficult than this. Thus have I formed my Dharma, thus have I expounded my Dharma, and thus have I taught my Dharma. You must receive it and practice it by the method prescribed."

Epilogue

[48] When the World-Honored One had finished his exposition of this sutra, aspiration for the highest Enlightenment was awakened in innumerable sentient beings. Twelve thousand nayutas of human beings attained the pure Dharma-eye; twenty-two kotis of devas and humans attained the Stage of a Non-returner; eight hundred thousand bhiksus realized the wisdom of destroying defilements; forty kotis of bodhisattvas attained the Stage of Non-retrogression; and all, adorned with the virtue of the universal vows, will ultimately attain perfect Enlightenment.

At that time the entire universe of a thousand million worlds shook in six ways, and a great light illuminated all the lands in the ten quarters. A hundred thousand kinds of music played spontaneously, and innumerable marvelous flowers fell in profusion from the sky.

When the Buddha finished delivering this sutra, the Bodhisattva Maitreya and bodhisattvas from the lands in the ten quarters, together with the Elder Ananda, other great shravakas, and all those in the assembly, without exception, rejoiced at the Buddha's discourse.

It is most convenient to mark the circle with chalk, paint or otherwise, to show where it is; but marks on the carpet may be utilized. Furniture may be placed to indicate the bounds. The only circle that matters is the one drawn before every ceremony with either a duly consecrated Magic Sword or an Athame. The circle is usually nine feet in diameter, unless made for some very special purpose. There are two outer circles, each six inches apart, so the third circle has a diameter of eleven feet.

[1] Having chosen a place proper, take the sickle or scimitar of Art or a Witch's Athame, if thou mayest obtain it, and stick it into the center, then take a cord, and 'twere well to use the Cable Tow for this, and loop it over the Instrument, four and one half feet, and so trace out the circumference of the circle, which must be traced either with the Sword, or the knife with the black hilt, or it be of little avail, but ever leave open a door towards the North. Make in all 3 circles, one within the other , and write names of power between these.

[2] First draw circle with Magic Sword or Athame.

[3] Consecrate Salt and Water: Touch water with Athame, saying, "I exorcise thee, O creature of Water, that thou cast out from Thee all the impurities and uncleannesses of the Spirits of the World of Phantasm, so they may harm me not, in the names of Aradia and Cernunnos."

[4] Touching Salt with Athame, say, "The Blessings of Aradia and Cernunnos be upon this creature of Salt, and let all malignity and hindrance be cast forth hencefrom, and let all good enter herein, for without Thee man cannot live, wherefore I bless thee and invoke thee, that thou mayest aid me."

[5] Then put the Salt into the water.

[6] Sprinkle with exorcised water.

[7] Light candles; say, "I exorcise thee, O Creature of Fire, that every kind of Phantasm may retire from thee, and be unable to harm or deceive in any way, in the names of Aradia and Cernunnos."

[8] Caution initiate (if any); warn companions; enter circle and close doors with 3 pentagrams.

[9] Proclaim object of working

[10] Circumambulate 3 times or more before commencing work.

[11] Summon: "I summon, stir, and Call thee up, thou Mighty Ones of the East, South, West, and North." Salute and draw pentacle with Magic Sword or Athame, the first stroke being from the top down to the left

High Priestess stands in front of Altar, assumes Goddess position (arms crossed). Magus, kneeling in front of her, draws pentacle on her body with Phallus-headed Wand, invokes, "I Invoke and beseech Thee, O mighty Mother of all life and fertility. By seed and root, by stem and bud, by leaf and flower and fruit, by Life and Love, do I invoke Thee to descend into the body of thy servant and High Priestess [name]." The Moon having been drawn down, i.e., link established, Magus and other men give Fivefold Kiss:

(kissing feet) "Blessed be thy feet, that have brought thee in these ways";

(kissing knees) "Blessed be thy knees, that shall kneel at the sacred altar";

(kissing womb) "Blessed be thy womb, without which we would not be";

(kissing breasts) "Blessed be thy breasts, formed in beauty and in strength";

(kissing lips) "Blessed be thy lips, that shall speak the sacred names."

Women all bow.

If there be an initiation, then at this time the Magus and the High Priestess in Goddess position (Arms Crossed) says the Charge while the Initiate stands outside the circle.

Magus: "Listen to the words of the Great mother, who of old was also called among men Artemis, Astarte, Dione, Melusine, Aphrodite, Cerridwen, Diana, Arianrhod, Bride, and by many other names."

High Priestess: "At mine Altars the youth of Lacedaemon in Sparta made due sacrifice. Whenever ye have need of anything, once in the month, and better it be when the moon is full, ye shall assemble in some secret place and adore the spirit of Me who am Queen of all Witcheries and magics. There ye shall assemble, ye who are fain to learn all sorcery, yet have not won its deepest secrets. To these will I teach things that are yet unknown. And ye shall be free from slavery, and as a sign that ye be really free, ye shall be naked in your rites, both men and women, and ye shall dance, sing, feast, make music, and love, all in my praise. There is a Secret Door that I have made to establish the way to taste even on earth the elixir of immortality. Say, 'Let ecstasy be mine, and joy on earth even to me, To Me,' For I am a gracious Goddess. I give unimaginable joys on earth, certainty, not faith, while in life! And upon death, peace unutterable, rest, and ecstasy, nor do I demand aught in sacrifice."

Magus: "Hear ye the words of the Star Goddess."

High Priestess: "I love you: I yearn for you: pale or purple, veiled or voluptuous. I who am all pleasure, and purple and drunkenness of the innermost senses, desire you. Put on the wings, arouse the coiled splendor within you. Come unto me, for I am the flame that burns in the heart of every man, and the core of every Star. Let it be your inmost divine self who art lost in the constant rapture of infinite joy. Let the rituals be rightly performed with joy and beauty. Remember that all acts of love and pleasure are my rituals. So let there be beauty and strength, leaping laughter, force and fire by within you. And if thou sayest, 'I have journeyed unto thee, and it availed me not,' rather shalt thou say, 'I called upon thee, and I waited patiently, and Lo, thou wast with me from the beginning,' for they that ever desired me shall ever attain me, even to the end of all desire.

This much of the rites must ever be performed to prepare for any initiation, whether of one degree or of all three.

Magus leaves circle by the doorway, goes to Postulant, and says, "Since there is no other brother here, I must be thy sponsor, as well as priest. I am about to give you a warning. If you are still of the same mind, answer it with these words: 'Perfect Love and Perfect Trust.'" Placing the point of the sword to the Postulant's breast, he says, "O thou who standeth on the threshold between the pleasant world of men and the domains of the Dread Lords of the Outer Spaces, hast thou the courage to make the Assay? For I tell thee verily, it were better to rush on my weapon and perish miserably than to make the attempt with fear in thy heart." Postulant: "I have two Passwords: Perfect Love and Perfect Trust." Magus drops the sword point, saying, "All who approach with perfect love and perfect trust are doubly welcome." Going around behind her, he blindfolds her, then putting his left arm around her waist and his right arm around her neck, he pulls her head back, says, "I give you the 3rd password, a Kiss to pass through this dread Door," and pushes her forward with his body, through the doorway and into the circle. Once inside, he releases her saying, "This is the way all are first brought into the circle." Magus closes the doorway by drawing the point of the sword across it three times, joining all three circles, saying, "Agla, Azoth, Adonai," then drawing three pentacles to seal it. Magus guides Postulant to south of altar, and whispers, "Now there is the Ordeal." Taking a short piece of cord from the altar, he ties it around her right ankle, saying, "Feet neither bound nor free." Taking a longer cord, he ties her hands together behind her back, then pulls them up, so that the arms form a triangle, and ties the cord around her neck, leaving the end dangling down in front as a Cable Tow. With the Cable Tow in his left hand and the sword in his right hand, the Magus leads her sunwise around the circle to the east, where he salutes with the sword and proclaims, "Take heed, O Lords of the Watchtowers of the East, (name), properly prepared, will be made a Priestess and a Witch." Magus leads her similarly to the south, west, and north, making the proclamation at each quarter. Next, clasping Postulant around the waist with his left arm, and holding the sword erect in his right hand, he makes her circumambulate three times around the circle with a half-running, half-dancing step. He halts her at the south of the altar, and strikes eleven knells on the bell. He then kneels at her feet, saying, "In other religions the postulant kneels, as the Priests claim supreme power, but in the Art Magical, we are taught to be humble, so we kneel to welcome them and say:

"Blessed be thy feet that have brought thee in these ways." (He kisses her feet.)

"Blessed be thy knees that shall kneel at the sacred altar." (He kisses her knees.)

"Blessed be thy womb, without which we would not be." (He kisses her Organ of Generation.)

"Blessed by thy breasts, formed in beauty and in strength." (He kisses her breasts.)

"Blessed be thy lips, which shall utter the sacred names." (He kisses her lips.)

Take measure thus: height, around forehead, across the heart, and across the genitals. Magus says, "Be pleased to kneel," and helps her kneel before the altar. He ties the end of the Cable Tow to a ring in the altar, so that the postulant is bent sharply forward, with her head almost touching the floor. He also ties her feet together with the short cord. Magus strikes three knells on the bell and says, "Art ready to swear that thou wilt always be true to the Art?"

Witch: "I am."

Magus strikes seven knells on the bell and says, "Before ye are sworn, art willing to pass the ordeal and be purified?"

Witch: "I am."

Magus strikes eleven knells on the bell, takes the scourge from the altar, and gives a series of three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes with the scourge across the postulant's buttocks. Magus says, "Ye have bravely passed the test. Art always ready to help, protect, and defend thy Brothers and Sisters of the Art?"

Witch: "I am."

Magus: "Art armed?"

Witch: "With a knife in my hair."

Magus: "Then on that knife wilt thou swear absolute secrecy?"

Witch: "I will."

Magus: "Then say after me. 'I, (name), in the presence of the Mighty Ones, do of my own will and accord, most solemnly swear that I will ever keep secret and never reveal the secrets of the Art, except it be to a proper person, properly prepared, within a circle such as I am now in. All this I swear by my hopes of a future life, mindful that my measure has been taken, and may my weapons turn against me if I break this my solemn oath.'"

Magus now unbinds her feet, unties the Cable Tow from the altar, removes the blindfold, and helps her up to her feet.

Magus says, "I hereby sign thee with the triple sign.

"I consecrate thee with oil." (He anoints her with oil on the womb, the right breast, the left breast, and the womb again.)

"I consecrate thee with wine." (He anoints her with wine in the same pattern.)

"I consecrate thee with my lips" (he kisses her in the same pattern), "Priestess and Witch."

Magus now unbinds her hands and removes the last cord, saying, "Now I Present to thee the Working Tools of a Witch. "First the Magic Sword. With this, as with the Athame, thou canst form all Magic Circles, dominate, subdue, and punish all rebellious Spirits and Demons, and even persuade the Angels and Geniuses. With this in your hand you are the ruler of the Circle. [Here "kiss" means that the initiate kisses the tool, and the Magus then kisses the Witch being initiated.]

"Next I present the Athame. This is the true Witch's weapon and has all the powers of the Magic Sword [kiss].

"Next I present the White-Handled Knife. Its use is to form all instruments used in the Art. It can only be properly used within a Magic Circle [Kiss].

"Next I present the Wand. Its use is to call up and control certain Angels and geniuses, to whom it would not be mete to use the Magic Sword [Kiss].

"Next I present the pentacles. These are for the purpose of calling up appropriate Spirits [Kiss].

"Next I present the Censer of Incense. This is used to encourage and welcome Good Spirits and to banish Evil Spirits.[kiss]

"Next I present the scourge. This is a sign of power and domination. It is also to cause suffering and purification, for it is written, to learn you must suffer and be purified. Art willing to suffer to learn?"

Witch: "I am."[Kiss]

Magus: "Next, and lastly I present the Cords. They are of use to bind the sigils in the Art, the material basis, and to enforce thy will. Also they are necessary in the oath. I Salute thee in the name of Aradia and Cernunnos, Newly made Priestess and Witch." Magus strikes seven knells on the bell and kisses Witch again, then circumambulates with her, proclaiming to the four quarters, "Hear, ye Mighty Ones, (name) hath been consecrated Priestess and Witch of the Gods." (Note, if ceremony ends here, close circle with "I thank ye for attending, and I dismiss ye to your pleasant abodes. Hail and farewell." If not, go to next degree.)

Magus binds Witch as before, but does not blindfold her, and circumambulates with her, proclaims to the four quarters, "Hear, ye Mighty Ones, (name), a duly consecrated Priestess and Witch, is now properly prepared to be made a High Priestess and Witch Queen." Magus now leads her thrice around the circle with the half-running, half-dancing step, halts south of the altar, has the Witch kneel, and ties her down to the altar as before.

Magus: "To attain this sublime degree, it is necessary to suffer and be purified. Art ready to suffer to Learn?"

Priestess Witch: "I am."

Magus: "I prepare thee to take the great oath."

He strikes three knells on the bell, and again gives the series of three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes with the scourge as before.

Magus: "I now give thee a new name: _______. [kiss]

Magus: "Repeat thy new name after me, I, (name), swear upon my mother's womb and by mine Honor among men and among my brothers and sisters of the Art, that I will never reveal to any at all any of the secrets of the Art, except it be to a worthy person, properly prepared, in the center of a Magic Circle, such as I am now in. This I swear by my hopes of Salvation, my past lives, and my hopes of future ones to come, and I devote myself to utter destruction if I break this my solemn oath."

Magus kneels, placing left hand under her knees and right hand on her head, thus forming magic link.

Magus: "I hereby will all my power into you." Wills.

Magus now unties her feet, unties the Cable Tow from the altar, and helps the Witch to her feet.

Magus: "I hereby sign and consecrate you with the great Magic Sign. Remember how it is formed and you will always recognize it.

"I consecrate thee with oil." (He anoints her with oil on her womb, right breast, left hip, right hip, left breast, and womb again, thus tracing a point-down pentacle.)

"I consecrate thee with wine." (He anoints her with wine in the same pattern.)

"I consecrate thee with my lips" (he kisses her in the same pattern), "High Priestess and Witch Queen."

Magus now unbinds Witch's hands and removes the cord, saying, "Newly made High Priestess and Witch Queen" [kiss] "you will now use the working tools in turn.

First, the Magic Sword; with it you will scribe the Magic Circle [kiss]

"Secondly, the Athame" (Form Circle) [kiss]

"Thirdly, the White Handled Knife" (use) [kiss]

"Fourthly, the Wand" (Wave to 4 Quarters) [kiss]

"Fifthly, the Pentacle" (Show to 4 Quarters) [kiss]

"Sixthly, the Censer of Incense" (Circle, cense) [kiss]

"Seventhly, the cords; bind me as I bound you." Witch binds Magus and ties him to Altar.

Magus: "Learn, in Witchcraft, thou must ever return triple. As I scourged thee, so thou must scourge me, but triple. So where you received 3, return 9; where you received 7, return 21; where you received 9, return 27; where you received 21, return 63." Witch scourges Magus as instructed, 120 strokes total.

Magus: "Thou hast obeyed the Law. But mark well, when thou receivest good, so equally art bound to return good threefold."

Witch now unbinds Magus and helps him to his feet. Magus, taking the new Initiate by the hand and holding the Athame in the other, passes once round the Circle, proclaiming at the Four Quarters, "Hear, Ye Mighty Ones, (name) hath been duly consecrated High Priestess and Witch Queen." (Note, if ceremony ends here, close circle with "Hail and farewell." If not go to next degree.)

Magus: "Ere we proceed with this sublime degree, I must beg purification at thy hands."

High Priestess binds Magus and ties him down to the altar. She circumambulates three times, and scourges Magus with three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes. She then unbinds him and helps him to his feet. Magus now binds the High Priestess and ties her down to the altar. He circumambulates, proclaiming to the four quarters, "Hear, ye mighty Ones, the twice consecrate and Holy (name), High Priestess and Witch Queen, is properly prepared and will now proceed to erect the Sacred Altar." Magus scourges High Priestess with three, seven, nine, and 21 strokes. Cakes and wine may now be taken [see "Cakes and Wine"].

Magus: "Now I must reveal to you a great Mystery." [kiss].

Note: if High Priestess has performed this rite before, omit these words. High Priestess assumes Osiris position.

Magus: "Assist me to erect the Ancient Altar, at which in days past all worshipped, the Great Altar of all things. For in the old times a woman was the Altar. Thus was the altar made and so placed [Priestess lies down in such a way that her vagina is approximately at the center of the circle], and the sacred place was the point within the center of the circle, as we of old times have been taught, that the point within the center is the origin of all things. Therefore should we adore it." [kiss]

"Therefore, whom we adore, we also invoke, by the power of the lifted lance." Invokes. "O circle of stars [kiss], whereof our Father is but the younger brother [kiss], "Marvel beyond imagination, soul of infinite space, before whom time is ashamed, the mind bewildered and understanding dark, not unto thee may we attain unless thine image be of love [kiss].

"Therefore, by seed and root, and stem and bud and leaf and flower and fruit do we invoke thee, O, Queen of space, O dew of light, O continuous one of the Heavens [kiss]. "Let it be ever thus, that men speak not of Thee as one, but as none, and let them not speak of thee at all, since thou art continuous, for thou art the point within the circle [kiss], which we adore [kiss], the fount of life without which we would not be [kiss]. "And in this way truly are erected the Holy Twin Pillars Boaz and Joachim [kisses breasts]. In beauty and strength were they erected, to the wonder and glory of all men."

(Eightfold Kiss: 3 points, Lips, 2 Breasts and back to lips; 5 points)

"O Secrets of secrets that art hidden in the being of all lives. Not thee do we adore, for that which adoreth is also thou. Thou art that and That am I [kiss].

"I am the flame that burns in every man, and in the core of every star [kiss].

"I am Life and the giver of Life, yet therefore is the knowledge of me the Knowledge of Death [kiss].

"I am alone, the Lord within ourselves whose name is Mystery of Mysteries [kiss].

"Make open the path of intelligence between us. For these truly are the 5 points of fellowship [on the right appears an illuminated diagram of the point-up triangle above the pentacle, the symbol for the third degree], feet to feet, knee to knee, groin to groin, breast to breast, arms around back, lips to lips, by the Great and Holy Names Abracadabra, Aradia, and Cernunnos.

Magus and High Priestess: "Encourage our hearts, Let thy Light crystallize itself in our blood, fulfilling us of Resurrection, for there is no part of us that is not of the Gods."

(Exchange Names.)

Closing the Circle High Priestess Circumambulates, proclaiming, "The twice consecrate High Priestess greets ye Mighty Ones, and dismisseth ye to your pleasant abodes. Hail and Farewell."

She draws the banishing pentacle at each quarter.

Magus kneels, fills Cup, offers to Witch [she is seated on the altar, holding her athame; Priest kneels before her, holding up the cup].

Witch, holding Athame between palms, places point in cup.

Magus: "As the Athame is the Male, so the Cup is the female; so, conjoined, they bring blessedness."

Witch lays aside Athame, takes Cup in both hands, drinks and gives drink. Magus Holds Paten to Witch, who blesses with Athame, then eats and gives to Eat. It is said that in olden days ale or mead was often used instead of wine. It is said that spirits or anything can be used so long as it has life.

Walk or slow dance, Magus leading High Priestess, both carrying Phallic wand or broom, people with torches or candles.

Witch chant or song: "Eko, eko, Azarak Eko, eko, Zomelak Bazabi lacha bachabe Lamac cahi achababe Karrellyos Lamac lamac Bachalyas cabahagy sabalyos Baryolos Lagoz atha cabyolas Samahac atha famolas Hurrahya!"

Form circle.

High Priestess assumes Goddess position.

Magus gives her Fivefold Kiss and is scourged.

All are purified [that is, bound and scourged with forty strokes, as in the initiation rituals].

Magus assumes God position.

High Priestess invokes with Athame: "Dread Lord of the shadows, god of life and the giver of life. Yet is the knowledge of thee the knowledge of death. Open wide, I pray thee, thy gates through which all must pass. Let our dear ones who have gone before, return this night to make merry with us. And when our time comes, as it must, O thou the comforter, the consoler, the giver of peace and rest, we will enter thy realms gladly and unafraid, for we know that when rested and refreshed among our dear ones, we shall be born again by thy grace and the grace of the Great Mother. Let it be in the same place and the same time as our beloved ones, and may we meet and know, and love them again. Descend, we pray thee, upon thy servant and Priest (name)."

High Priestess gives Fivefold Kiss to Magus.

Initiations if any; all others are purified.

(Note: Couples may purify each other if they will.)

Cakes and Wine.

The Great Rite if possible, either in token or truly.

Dismiss [the guardians, and close down the magic circle; the people then stay to] feast and dance.

After usual opening, all are doubly purified [that is, with eighty strokes].

Dance round outside circle, High Priestess with sword girded on and drawn, Phallic wand in left hand.

Enter circle.

Magus assumes God position.

High Priestess gives Fivefold Kiss, invokes: "Dread Lord of death and Resurrection, life and the giver of life, Lord within ourselves, whose name is Mystery of Mysteries, encourage our hearts. Let the light crystalize in our blood, fulfilling us of resurrection, for there is no part of us that is not of the gods. Descend, we pray thee, upon this thy servant and Priest (name)."

All should be purified in sacrifice before him. He then purifies the High Priestess with his own hands, and others if he will.

Cakes and wine.

Great Rite if possible, in token or real.

Games and dance as the people will.

Dismiss [the guardians, and close down the magic circle; the people then stay to] feast and dance.

If possible ride poles, brooms, etc. High Priestess leading, quick dance step, singing

"O do not tell the priests of our arts. For they would call it sin, For we will be in the woods all night Aconjuring conjuring summer in.

And we bring you good news by word of mouth. For women, cattle, and corn: The sun is coming up from the south,With oak and ash, and thorn."

Meeting dance if possible.

Form circle as usual, and purify.

High Priestess assumes Goddess position; officers all give her the fivefold kiss.

She purifies all.

High Priestess again assumes Goddess position.

Magus invokes, draws down moon, "I invoke thee and call upon thee, O mighty Mother of us all, bringer of all fruitfulness, By seed and root, by stem and bud, by leaf and flower and fruit, by life and love, do we invoke thee, to descend upon the body of thy servant and Priestess here."

Magus gives Fivefold Kiss to High Priestess.

All should be purified in sacrifice before her, and she should purify Magus and some others with her own hands.

Cakes and wine.

Games.

Great Rite if possible, in token or truly.

Dismiss [the guardians, and close down the magic circle; the people then stay to] feast and dance.

If possible, ride poles, broomsticks, etc.

Meeting Dance if possible [the double-spiral dance described in Witchcraft Today, p. 167].

Form circle.

Purify.

High Priestess stands in pentacle position.

Magus invokes her: "O mighty Mother of us all, Mother of all fruitfulness, give us fruit and grain, flocks and herds and children to the tribe that we be mighty, by thy rosy love, do thou descend upon thy servant and Priestess (name) here."

Magus gives Fivefold Kiss to High Priestess.

Candle game: Seated, the men form a circle, passing a lighted candle from hand to hand "deosil". The women form circle outside, trying to blow it out over their shoulders. Whoever's hand it is in when it is blown out is 3 times purified by whoever blew it out, giving fivefold Kiss in return. This game may go on as long as the people like.

Cakes and wine, and any other games you like.

Dismiss [the guardians, and close down the magic circle; the people then stay to] feast and dance.

Of old there were many chants and songs used especially in the Dances. Many of these have been forgotten by us here, but we know that they used cries of IAU which seems muchly like the cries EVO or EVOHE of the ancients. Much dependeth on the pronunciation if this be so. In my youth, when I heard IAU it seemed to be AEIOU, or rather, AAAEEIOOOOUU. This may be but the natural way to prolong it to make it fit for a call, but it suggests that these be possibly the initials of an invocation as Agla is said to be, and of sooth 'tis said that the whole Hebrew alphabet is said to be such, and for this reason is recited as a most powerful charm, but at least this is certain, these cries during the dances do have profound effect, as I myself have seen.

Other calls are IEHOUA and EHEIE; also Ho Ho Ho Ise Ise Ise.

IEO VEO VEO VEO VEOV OROV OV OVOVO may be a spell but is more likely to be a call. 'Tis like the EVOE EVOE of the Greeks and the "Heave ho!" of sailors. "Emen hetan" and "Ab hur, ab hus" seem calls; as "Horse and hattock, horse and go, horse and Pellatis, ho, ho, ho!"

"Thout, tout a tout tout, throughout and about" and "Rentum tormentum" are probably mispronounced attempts at a forgotten formula, though they may have been invented by some unfortunate being tortured, to evade telling the real formula.

Ever remember the promise of the goddess, "For ecstasy is mine and joy on earth" so let there ever be joy in your heart. Greet people with joy, be glad to see them. If times be hard, think, "It might have been worse. I at least have known the joys of the Sabbath, and I will know them again." Think of the grandeur, beauty, and Poetry of the rites, of the loved ones you meet through them. If you dwell on this inner joy, your health will be better. You must try to banish all fear, for it will really touch you. It may hurt your body, but your soul is beyond it all.

[2] And ever remember, that if you help others it makes you forget your own woes. And if another be in pain, do what you may to distract his attention from it. Do not say "You have no pain," but if you may, administer the drugs which sooth as well as those that cure. But ever strive to make them believe they are getting better. Install into them happy thoughts. If you can only get this into his inner mind so that it be always believed.

[3] To this end it is not wrong to let people think that we of the cult have more power than we have. For the truth is that if they believe we have more power than we really possess, we do really possess these powers, insomuch we can do good to them.

[4] You must try to find out about people. If you tell a slightly sick man, "You are looking better. You will soon be well," he will feel better, but if he is really ill, or in pain, his Knowledge that he is in pain will cause him to doubt your words in future. But if you give him one of the drugs and then say, "The pain is growing less. Soon it will be gone," because the pain goes, the next time you say, "The pain is going," he will believe you and the pain will really get less. But you must ever say so with conviction, and this conviction must come from your believing it yourself, because you yourself know that if you can fix his mind so that he believes you, it is true.

[5] 'Tis often better to look exactly between their eyes, looking as if your eyes pierced their heads, opening your eyes as wide as you may and never blink. This continued gazing oft causes the patient to grow sleepy. If they show signs of this, say "You are growing sleepy. You will sleep, you are tired. Sleep. Your eyes grow tired. Sleep." If they close their eyes, say "Your eyes close, you are tired, you cannot open your eyes." If they cannot, say "Your arms are tired, you cannot raise them." If they cannot, say "I am master of your mind. You must ever believe what I tell you. When I look like this into your eyes you will sleep and be subject to my will," then tell them they will sleep and wake up refreshed, feeling better. Continue this with soothing and healing drugs, and try to infuse into them the feeling of ecstasy that you feel at the Sabbath. They cannot feel it in full, but you can command them to feel what is in your own mind, and try to concentrate on this ecstasy. I f you may safely tell that you are of the Cult, your task may be easier. And it were well to command them to know it only with their sleeping mind, and forget it, or to be at least unable to tell anyone about it when awake. A good way is to command them that, if they are ever questioned about Witchcraft or Witches, to immediately fall asleep.

[6] Ever remember if tempted to admit or boast of belonging to the cult you be endangering your brothers, for though now the fires of persecution may have died down, who knows when they may be revived? Many priests have knowledge of our secrets, and they well know that, though much religious bigotry has calmed down, many people would wish to join our cult. And if the truth were known of its joys, the Churches would lose power, so if we take many recruits, we may loose the fires of persecution against us a gain. So ever keep the secrets.

[7] Think joy, think love, try to help others and bring joy into their lives. Children are naturally easier to influence than grown people. Ever strive to work through people's existing beliefs. For instance, more than half of the world believe in amulets. An ordinary stone is not an amulet but if it hath a natural hole in it, it must be something unusual, so if the patient hath this belief give him one. But first carry it next your skin for a few days, forcing your will into it, to cure pain, to feel s safe, or against their particular fear, and this amulet may keep imposing your will when you are absent. The masters of talismans knew this full well when they say they must be made in a circle, to avoid distraction, by someone whose mind is on the subject of the work.

[8] But keep your own mind happy. Remember the Words of the Goddess: "I give unimaginable joys on Earth, certainty, not faith, while in life, and upon death, peace unutterable, rest, and ecstasy, and the promise that you will return again." In the old days many of us went to the flames laughing and singing, and so we may again. We may have joy in life and beauty, and peace and Death and the promise of return.

[9] The Bible speaks sooth, "A merry heart doeth good like a medicine but a broken spirit breaketh the bones." But you may not have a merry heart. Perchance you were born under an evil star. I think that the effects of the stars are overestimated, but you cannot make a merry heart to order, you say. But you can, in the Cult; there be secret processes by which your will and imagination may be influenced. This process also affects the body, and brings it to joy. Your body is happy, so your mind is happy . You are well because you are happy, and you are happy because you are well.

[10] Prayer may be used with good result if the patient believes it can and will work. Many believe it can, but do not believe their God or saint will help. Prayers to the Goddess help, especially the Amalthean Horn Prayer, as it causes stimulation to the body as well as to the mind.

Invocation

(Feet, knees, and wrists should be tightly bound to retard blood.) Scourge 40 or more, to make skin tingle, then say, invoking Goddess,

Hail, Aradia, from the Amalthean horn Pour forth thy store of Love. I lowly bend Before Thee! I invoke thee at the end When other Gods are fallen and put to scorn. Thy foot is to my lips! My sighs inborn Rise, touch, curl about thy heart. Then spend, Pitiful Love, loveliest Pity, descend And bring me luck who am lonely and forlorn.

Ask the Goddess to help you to obtain your desires, then Scourge again to bind the spell. This be powerful in ill luck and for sickness. It must be said in a Circle, and you must be properly prepared and well purified, both before and after saying, to bind the spell. Before starting you must make a very clear picture in your mind of what you wish. Make yourself see the wish obtained. Be sure in your own mind exactly what it is and how it is to be fulfilled. This spell is the one that was taught to me long ago and I have found it works, but I don't think there is any special virtue in these words. Any others can be

substituted provided they ask the goddess's (or gods') help, and say clearly what you wish and you form the clear mental image; and if it doesn't work at first, keep on trying till it works. Your helper, who wields the scourge, must know what you wish, and also form the mental image. And at first at any rate, it will be better for you to work the spell, then for the girl to take your place and work it also; you scourge her. Don't try anything difficult at first, and do it at least once a week till it works. You have to get into sympathy with each other, before anything happens, and regular working helps this. Of spells, the exact words matter little if the intent be clear and you raise the true power, and sufficient thereof. Always in rhyme they are. There is something queer about rhyme. I have tried, and the same seem to lose their power if you miss the rhyme. Also in rhyme, the words seem to say themselves. You do not have to pause and think: "What comes next?" Doing this takes away much of your intent.

[2] Order and discipline must be kept. A High Priest or Priestess may and should punish all faults to this end, and all of the Cult must accept such corrections willingly. All are brothers and sisters, for this reason: that even the High Priestess must submit to the scourge. Each fault should be corrected separately. The Priest or Priestess must be properly prepared and call the culprit to trial. They must be prepared as for initiation and kneel, be told their fault and sentence pronounced. Punishment should be the scourge, followed by a forfeit such as several fivefold kisses or something of this nature. The culprit must acknowledge the justice of the punishment by kissing hands and scourge on receiving sentence and again when thanking for punishment received. 1

[3] The scourgings are 3, 7, 9 (thrice three), and 21 (thrice seven) 40 in all. It is not meet to make offerings [scourgings] of less than two score to the Goddess, for here be a mystery. The fortunate numbers be: 3 and 5. For three added to two (the Perfect Couple) be five. And three and five be eight; eight and five be thirteen; thirteen and eight be twenty-one. The Fivefold Kiss is called 5, but there are 8 kisses, for there be 2 feet and 2 knees and genitals and 2 breasts and the lips. And 5 times 8 be two score. Also, fortunate numbers be 3, 7, 8, and 21, which total 40, or two score. For each man and woman hath ten fingers and ten toes, so each totals a score. And a perfect couple be two score. So a lesser number would not be perfect prayer. If more are required make it a perfect number, as four score or six score. Also there be Eight Elemental Weapons.

[4] To make the anointing ointment, take some glazed pans filled half full with grease or olive oil. Put in one sweet mint, marjoram in another, ground thyme in a 3rd, and it you may have it, patchouli, dried leaves pounded. Place pans in hot water bath. Stir and cook for several hours, then pout into linen bags, and squeeze grease through into pans again, and fill up with fresh leaves. After doing this several times, the grease will be highly perfumed. Then mix all together and store in a well-corked jar. Anoint behind ears, throat, armpits, breasts, and womb. Also, for all ceremonies where the feet are kissed, they should also be anointed.
One learns to know the body of man through the bodily senses. And the way of observing it can differ in no way from that by which one learns to know other objects perceived by the senses. As one observes minerals, plants, animals, so can one observe man also. He is related to these three forms of existence. Like the minerals he builds his body out of the materials in nature; like the plants he grows and propagates his species; he perceives the objects around him and, like the animals, forms on the basis of the impressions they make his inner experiences. One may therefore ascribe to man a mineral, a plant, and an animal existence.
The difference in the structure of minerals, plants, and animals corresponds with these three forms of existence. And it is this structure, this shape which one perceives through the senses, and which alone one can call body. But the human body is different from that of the animal. This difference everybody must recognize whatever may be his opinion in other respects regarding the relationship of man to animals. Even the most radical materialist who denies all soul will not be able to avoid agreeing with the following sentence which Carus utters in his "Organon der Natur and des Geistes". "The finer, inner construction of the nervous system, and especially of the brain, remains as yet an unsolved problem to the physiologist and the anatomist; but that this concentration of the structure increases more and more in the animal, and in man reaches a stage unequaled in any other being, is a fully established fact, a fact which is of the deepest significance in regard to the spiritual evolution of man, of which, indeed, we may frankly say it is a sufficient explanation. Where, therefore, the structure of the brain has not developed properly, where its smallness and poverty show themselves, as in the case of microcephali and idiots, it goes without saying that one can as little expect the appearance of original ideas and of knowledge, as one can expect propagation of species in persons with completely stunted organs of generation. On the other hand, a strong and beautiful construction of the whole person, especially of the brain, will certainly not in itself take the place of genius, but it will at any rate supply the first and indispensable requirement for higher knowledge." Just as one ascribes to the human body the three forms of existence, mineral, plant, animal, one must now ascribe to it yet a fourth, the distinctively human form. Through his mineral form of existence man is related to everything visible, through his plant-like form of existence to all beings that grow and propagate their species, through his animal existence to all those that perceive their surroundings, and by means of external impressions have inner experiences. Through his human form of existence he constitutes, even in regard to his body alone, a kingdom by himself.
The soul being of man differs from his corporality through being his own inner world. This inner world peculiar to each person faces one the moment one directs one's attention to the simplest sensation. One finds, in the first place, that no one can know if another person perceives even the simplest sensation in exactly the same way as one does oneself. It is known that there are people who are colorblind. They see things only in different shades of gray. Others are partially colorblind. They are unable, because of this, to perceive certain shades of colors. The picture of the world which their eyes give them is different from that of so-called normal persons. And the same holds good in regard to the other senses. It will be seen, therefore, without further elaboration, that even simple sensations belong to the inner world. I can perceive with my bodily senses the red table which another person also perceives; but I cannot perceive his sensation of red. One must therefore describe sensation as belonging to the soul. If one grasps this fact alone quite clearly, he will soon cease to regard inner experiences as mere brain processes or something similar. The first result of sensation is feeling. One sensation causes man pleasure, another displeasure. These are stirrings of his inner, his soul life. Man creates in his feelings a second world in addition to that which works on him from without. And a third is added to this—the will. Through it man reacts on the outer world. And he thereby stamps the impress of his inner being on the outer world. The soul of man, as it were, flows outward in the activities of his will. The actions of the human being differ from the occurrences of outer nature in that they bear the impress of his inner life. In this way the soul represents what is man's own in contradistinction to the outer world. He receives from the outer world the incitements; but he creates, in responding to these incitements, a world of his own. The corporality becomes the foundation of the soul being of man.
The soul being of man is not determined by the body alone. Man does not wander aimlessly and without a goal from one sensation to another; neither does he act under the influence of every casual incitement directed on him either from without or through the processes of his body. He thinks about his perceptions and his acts. By thinking about his perceptions he gains knowledge of things; by thinking about his acts he introduces a reasonable coherence into his life. He knows also that he will fulfill his duty as a human being only when he lets himself be guided by correct thinking in knowledge as well as in acts. The soul of man, therefore, faces a twofold necessity. The laws of the body govern it in accordance with the necessities of nature, but it allows itself to be governed by the laws which guide it to exact thinking because it voluntarily acknowledges their necessity. Nature subjects man to the laws of the change of matter, but he subjects himself to the laws of thought. By this means he makes himself a member of a higher order than that to which he belongs through his body. And this order is the spiritual. The soul is as different from the body as the body is different from the soul. So long as one speaks only of the particles of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen which stir in the body, one has not the soul in view. The soul life begins only when within the motion of these particles sensation arises, and one can say: "I taste sweetness" or "I feel pleasure." Just as little has one the spiritual in view when one considers merely the soul experiences which course through a man who gives himself over entirely to the outer world and his bodily life. Rather is this soul life merely the basis for the spiritual, just as the body is the basis of the soul life. The naturalist, or investigator of nature, has to do with the body, the investigator of the soul (the psychologist) with the soul, and the investigator of the spirit with the spirit. To realize what one is in oneself, and thus become clear as to the difference between body, soul, and spirit, is a requirement which must be demanded from those who wish by thinking to enlighten themselves regarding the constitution of man.
Man can enlighten himself in a correct way concerning himself only when he grasps the significance of thinking within his being. The brain is the bodily instrument for thinking. Just as man can only see colors with a properly constructed eye, so the suitably constructed brain serves him for thought. The whole body of man is so formed that it receives its crown in the organ of the spirit, the brain. One can understand the construction of the human brain only by observing it in relation to its task, which consists in being the instrument or tool for the thinking spirit. This is borne out by a comparative survey of the animal world. Among amphibians we find the brain small in comparison with the spinal cord, in mammals it is proportionately larger, in man it is largest in comparison with the rest of the body. There are many prejudices prevalent regarding such statements about thinking as are brought forward here. Many persons are inclined to undervalue thinking, and to place higher the "warm life of feeling" or "emotion." Some, indeed, say it is not by "dry thinking" but by warmth of feeling, by the immediate power of "the emotions," that one raises oneself to higher knowledge. Persons who speak thus fear to blunt the feelings by clear thinking. This certainly results from the ordinary thinking that refers only to matters of utility. But in the case of thoughts that lead to higher regions of existence, the opposite is the result. There is no feeling and no enthusiasm to be compared with the sentiments of warmth, beauty, and exaltation which are enkindled through the pure, crystal-clear thoughts which refer to the higher worlds. For the highest feelings are, as a matter of fact, not those which come "of themselves," but those which are gained by energetic and persevering thinking.

The human body has a construction adapted to thinking. The same materials and forces which are present in the mineral kingdom are so combined in the human body that by means of these combinations thought can manifest itself. This mineral construction, formed as a suitable instrument for its work, will be called in the following pages the physical body of man. (In theosophical literature it is called "Sthula sharira.")

This organized mineral construction with the brain as its center comes into existence by propagation, and reaches its developed form through growth. Propagation and growth man has in common with plants and animals. Propagation and growth distinguish what is living from the lifeless mineral. What lives comes forth from the living by means of the germ. The descendant follows the forefathers in the succession of the living. The forces through which a mineral originates we must look for in the materials themselves which compose it. A quartz crystal is formed by the forces united in it, and inherent in the silicon and oxygen. The forces which shape an oak tree we must look for in a roundabout way in the germ in the mother and father plants. The form of the oak is preserved through propagation from forefathers to descendants. There are inner determining forces innate in all that is living. It was a crude view of nature which held that lower animals, even fishes, could evolve out of mud. The form of the living passes itself on by means of heredity. The manner in which a living being develops depends on what father and mother beings it has sprung from or, in other words, on the species to which it belongs. The materials of which it is composed change continually; the species remains during life, and is transmitted to the descendants. Thus the species is that which conditions the organizing and molding of the materials. This species-forming force will here be called life-force (in theosophical literature it is called "Prana"). Just as the mineral forces express themselves in crystals, so the life-force expresses itself in the species or form of plant and animal life.

The mineral forces are perceived by man by means of the bodily senses. And he can only perceive that for which he has such senses. Without the eye there is no perception of light, without the ear no perception of sound. The lowest order of organic beings has only a kind of sense of touch. For these there exist only those mineral forces of which the sense of touch enables them to become aware. In proportion as the other senses are developed in the higher animals is the surrounding world richer and more varied for them. It depends, therefore, on the organs of a being whether that which exists in the outer world exists also for the being itself, as perception, as sensation. What is present in the air as a certain motion becomes in man the sensation of hearing. Man does not perceive the manifestations of the life-force through the ordinary senses. He sees the colors of the plants; he smells their perfume; the life-force remains hidden from this form of observation. But the ordinary senses have just as little right to deny the existence of the life-force as has the man born blind to deny that colors exist. Colors are there for the person born blind just as soon as he has been operated upon; in the same way, the life-force, as creating the various species of plants and animals created by it, is present to man as an object of perception as soon as the necessary organ unfolds within him. An entirely new world opens out to man through the unfolding of this organ. He now perceives, not merely the colors, the odors, etc., of the beings, but these beings themselves. In each plant, in each animal, he perceives, besides the physical form, the life-filled spirit-form. In order to have a name for this spirit-form let it be called the ether-body, or life-body.

To the investigator of spiritual life this matter presents itself in the following manner: The ether-body is for him not merely a product of the materials and forces of the physical body, but a real independent entity which first calls forth these physical materials and forces into life. One speaks in harmony with spiritual science when one says: a mere physical body, a crystal for example, has its form by means of the physical formative forces dwelling within it. A living body does not have its form by means of these forces, for in the moment in which life is extinct in it, and it is given over to the physical forces only, it falls to pieces. The ether-body is an organism which preserves the physical body every moment during life from dissolution. In order to see this body, to perceive it in another being, one requires the awakened "spiritual eye." Without this, one can accept its existence as a fact on logical grounds; but one can see it with the spiritual eye as one sees a color with the physical eye. One should not take offense at the expression "ether-body." "Ether" here designates something different from the hypothetical ether of the physicist. One should regard the thing simply as a name for what is described here. And just as the physical body of man is constructed in conformity with its set task, so is it also in conformity with the ether-body of man. One can understand it also only when one observes it in relation to the thinking spirit. The ether-body of man differs from that of plants and animals through being organized so as to serve the requirements of the thinking spirit. Just as man belongs to the mineral world through his physical body, he belongs through his ether-body to the life-world. After death the physical body dissolves into the mineral world, the ether-body into the life-world. (In theosophical literature the human ether-body is called "Linga sharira.") By the word "body" is designated what in any way gives a being "shape" or "form." The word used in this sense must not be confused with the word body when used to designate physically sensible bodies. Used in this sense the term body can also be applied to forms which soul and spirit may assume.

In the life-body we still have something external to man. With the first stirrings of sensation the inner self responds to the excitations of the outer world. You may trace what one is justified in calling the outer world ever so far, but you will not be able to find the sensation. Rays of light stream into the eye, penetrating till they reach the retina. There they call forth chemical processes (in the so-called visual-purple); the effect of this stimulus is passed on through the optic nerve to the brain; there further physical processes arise. Could one observe these one would see more physical processes, just as elsewhere in the physical world. If I am able to observe the ether-body, I will see how the physical-brain process is at the same time a life-process. But the sensation of blue color which the recipient of the rays of light has, I can find nowhere in this manner. It arises only within the soul of the recipient. If, therefore, the being of the recipient consisted only of the physical body and the ether-body, sensation could not exist. The activity by which sensation becomes a fact differs essentially from the operations of the life-force. By that activity an inner experience is called forth from these operations. Without this activity there would be a mere life-process, such as one observes in plants. If one tries to picture how a human being receives impacts from all sides, one must think of him at the same time as the source of the above-mentioned activity which streams out toward every point from which he received these impacts. Sensations respond in all directions to the impacts. This fountain of activity is to be called the sentient-soul. (It is the same as that which in theosophical literature is called "Kama.") This sentient-soul is just as real as the physical body. If a man stand before me and I disregard his sentient-soul by thinking of him as merely a physical body, it is exactly as if I were to call up in my mind, instead of a painting—merely the canvas.

A similar statement has to be made in regard to perceiving the sentient-soul as was previously made in reference to the ether-body. The bodily organs are "blind" to it. And blind to it is also the organ by which life as life can be perceived. But just as the ether-body is seen by means of this organ, the inner world of sensation itself can be seen through a still higher organ. A man then not only senses the impressions of the physical and life worlds, but he beholds the sensations themselves. Before a man with such an organ the world of the sensations of another being is spread out like an open and, for him, a legible book. One must distinguish between experiencing one's own sensation world and looking at the sensation world of another. Every man of course can see into his own sensation world; only the seer with the opened "spiritual eye" can see the sensation world of another. Unless a man be a seer he knows the sensation world only as an "inner" one, only as the peculiar hidden experiences of his own soul; with the opened "spiritual eye" there shines out before the external spiritual gaze what otherwise lives only in the "inner" being of another.
The sentient-soul depends, as regards its activity, on the ether-body because it draws from it that which it will cause to gleam forth as sensation. And since the ether-body is the life within the physical body, the sentient-soul is indirectly dependent on the latter. Only with correctly-functioning and well-constructed eyes are correct color sensations possible. It is in this way that the corporality affects the sentient-soul. The latter is thus determined and limited in its efficaciousness by the body. It lives therefore within the limitations fixed for it by the corporality. The body accordingly is built up of mineral materials, is vitalized by the ether-body, and itself limits the sentient-soul. He, therefore, who has the above-mentioned organ for "seeing" the sentient-soul, sees it limited by the body. But the limits of the sentient-soul do not coincide with those of the physical body. The soul extends somewhat beyond it. By this one sees that it proves itself more powerful than the physical body. But the force through which its limits are set proceeds from the physical body. So that between the physical body and the ether-body on the one hand,and the sentient-soul on the other, there inserts itself another distinct member of the human constitution. This is the soul-body, or sentient body. (It is called in theosophical literature "astral shape," or "Kama Rupa;" "Rupa" signifies form or shape.) One can also say: a part of the ether-body is finer than the rest, and this finer part of the ether-body forms a unity with the sentient-soul, whereas the coarser part forms a kind of unity with the physical body. Nevertheless, the sentient-soul extends, as has been said, beyond the soul-body.

What is here called sensation is only a part of the soul being. (The expression sentient-soul is chosen for the sake of simplicity.) Connected with sensations are the feelings of desire and aversion, impulses, instincts, passions. All this bears the same character of individualized life as do the sensations, and is, like them, dependent on the corporality.

Just as the sentient-soul enters into mutual action and reaction with the body, so does it also with thinking, with the spirit. Thought, among other things, is of immediate service to it. Man forms thoughts about his sensations.
In this way he enlightens himself regarding the outside world. The child that has burnt itself thinks it over, and reaches the thought "fire burns." Also man does not follow blindly his impulses, instincts, passions; his thought over them brings about the opportunity by which he can gratify them. What one calls material civilization moves entirely in this direction. It consists in the services which thinking renders to the sentient-soul. Immeasureable quantities of thought-power are directed to this end. It is thought-power that has built ships, railways, telegraphs, telephones; and by far the greatest proportion of all this serves only to satisfy the needs of the sentient-soul. Thought-force permeates the sentient-soul in a similar way to that in which the life-force permeates the physical body. Life-force connects the physical body with forefathers and descendants, and thus brings it under a system of laws with which the purely mineral body is in no way concerned. In the same way thought-force brings the soul under a system of laws to which it does not belong as mere sentient-soul. Through the sentient-soul man is related to the animals.
In animals, also, we observe the presence of sensations, impulses, instincts, and passions. But the animal obeys these immediately. They do not, in its case, become interwoven with independent thoughts, transcending the immediate experiences. This is also the case to a certain extent with undeveloped human beings. The mere sentient-soul is therefore different from the evolved higher member of the soul which brings thinking into its service. This soul that is served by thought will be designated the intellectual-soul. One could call it also the emotional thought-soul. (Theosophical literature calls it "Kama manas.")

The intellectual-soul permeates the sentient-soul. He who has the organ for "seeing" the soul sees, therefore, the intellectual-soul as a separate entity, distinct from the mere sentient-soul.

By thinking man is raised above and beyond his own personal life. He acquires something that extends beyond his soul. He comes to take for granted his conviction that the laws of thought are in conformity with the laws of the world. And he feels at home in the world because this conformity exists. This conformity is one of the important facts through which man learns to know his own nature. Man searches in his soul for truth; and through this truth it is not only the soul that speaks, but the things of the world. That which is recognized as truth by means of thought has an independent significance, which refers to the things of the world, and not merely to one's own soul. My delight in the starry heavens is part of my own inner being; the thoughts which I form for myself about the courses of the heavenly bodies have the same significance for the thinking of every other person as they have for mine. It would be absurd to speak of my delight were I not in existence; but it is not in the same way absurd to speak of my thoughts, even without reference to myself. For the truth which I think to-day was true yesterday also, and will be true to-morrow, although I concern myself with it only to-day. If a piece of knowledge gives me joy, the joy has significance just so long as it lives in me. The truth of the knowledge has its significance quite independently of the joy. By grasping the truth the soul connects itself with something that carries its worth in itself. And this worth does not vanish with the feeling in the soul any more than it arose with it. What is really truth neither arises nor passes away; it has a significance which cannot be destroyed. This is not contradicted by the fact that certain human "truths" have a value which is transitory, inasmuch as they are recognized after a certain period as partial or complete errors. For man must say to himself that truth after all exists in itself, although his conceptions are only transient forms of manifestation of the eternal truth. Even he who says, like Lessing, that he contents himself with the eternal striving toward truth because the full pure truth can, after all, only exist for a God, does not deny the eternity of truth, but establishes it by such an utterance. For only that which has an eternal significance in itself can call forth an eternal striving after it. Were truth not in itself independent, if it acquired its worth and significance through the feelings of the human soul, then it could not be the one common goal for all mankind. One concedes its independent being by the very fact that one wishes to strive after it.

And as it is with the truth, so it is with the truly good. The moral good is independent of inclinations and passions, inasmuch as it does not allow itself to be commanded by them, but commands them. Likes and dislikes, desire and loathing belong to the personal soul of man. Duty stands higher than likes and dislikes. Duty may stand so high in the eyes of a man that he will sacrifice his life for its sake. And a man stands the higher the more he has ennobled his inclinations, his likes and dislikes, so that, without compulsion or subjection, they themselves obey the recognized duty. The moral good has, like truth, its eternal value in itself, and does not receive it from the sentient-soul.

In causing the self-existent true and good to come to life in his inner being, man raises himself above the mere sentient-soul. The eternal spirit shines into this soul. A light is kindled in it which is imperishable. In so far as the soul lives in this light, it is a participant of the eternal. It unites its own existence with an eternal existence. What the soul carries within itself of the true and the good is immortal in it. That which shines forth in the soul as eternal is to be called here consciousness-soul. consciousness can be spoken of even in connection with the lower soul stirrings. The most ordinary everyday sensation is a matter of consciousness. To this extent animals also have consciousness. The kernel of human consciousness, that is, the soul within the soul, is here meant by consciousness-soul. The consciousness-soul is accordingly differentiated from the intellectual-soul as yet another distinct member of the human soul. The intellectual-soul is still entangled in the sensations, the impulses, the passions, etc. Everyone knows how at first a man holds that to be true which he, owing to his feelings, prefers. Only that truth, however, is permanent which has freed itself from all taint of such feelings as sympathy and antipathy. The truth is true, even if all personal feelings revolt against it. The part of the soul in which this truth lives will be called consciousness-soul.

So that even as one had to distinguish three members in the body, one has also to distinguish three in the soul; sentient-soul, intellectual-soul, consciousness-soul. And just as the corporality works from below upward with a limiting effect on the soul, so the spiritual works from above downward into it, expanding it. For the more the soul fills itself with the True and the Good, the wider and the more comprehensive becomes the eternal in it. To him who is able to "see" the soul, the splendor which goes out from a human being, because his eternal is expanding, is just as much a reality as the light which streams out from a flame is real to the physical eye. For the "seer" the corporeal man is only a part of the whole man. The body as the coarsest structure lies within others, which interpenetrate both it and each other. The ether-body fills the physical body as a double form; extending beyond this on all sides is to be seen the soul-body (astral shape). And beyond this, again, extends the sentient-soul, then the intellectual-soul, which grows the larger the more it receives into itself of the True and the Good. For this True and Good cause the expansion of the intellectual-soul. A man living only and entirely according to his inclinations, his likes and dislikes, would have an intellectual-soul whose limits coincide with those of his sentient-soul. These organizations, in the midst of which the physical body appears as if in a cloud, are called the human aura.

In the course of the childhood of a human being, there comes a moment in which, for the first time, he feels himself to be an independent being distinct from the whole of the rest of the world. For persons with finely-strung natures it is a significant experience. The poet Jean Paul says in his autobiography, "I shall never forget the event which took place within me, hitherto narrated to no one, and of which I can give place and time, when I stood present at the birth of my self-consciousness. As a very small child I stood at the door of the house one morning, looking toward the wood pile on my left, when suddenly the inner revelation 'I am an I' came to me like a flash of lightning from heaven and has remained shining ever since. In that moment my ego had seen itself for the first time and forever. Any deception of memory is hardly to be conceived as possible here, for no narrations by outsiders could have introduced additions to an occurrence which took place in the holy of holies of a human being, and of which the novelty alone gave permanence to such everyday surroundings." It is known that little children say to themselves, "Charles is good," "Mary wishes to have this." They speak of themselves as if of others because they have not yet become conscious of their independent existence, because the consciousness of the self is not yet born in them. Through self-consciousness man describes himself as an independent being, separate from all others, as "I." In his "I" man brings together all that he experiences as a being in body and soul. Body and soul are the carriers of the ego or "I;" in them it acts. Just as the physical body has its center in the brain, so has the soul its center in the ego. Man is aroused to sensations by impacts from without; feelings manifest themselves as the effects of the outer world; the will relates itself to the outside world in that it realizes itself in external actions. The ego as the peculiar and essential being of man remains quite invisible. Excellently, therefore, does Jean Paul call a man's recognition of his ego an "occurrence taking place only in the veiled holy of holies of a man," for with his "I" man is quite alone. And this "I" is the man himself. That justifies him in regarding his ego as his true being. He may, therefore, describe his body and his soul as the "sheaths" or "veils" within which he lives; and he may describe them as his tools through which he acts. In the course of his evolution he learns to regard these tools ever more and more as the servants of his ego. The little word "I" (German ich) as it is used, for example, in the English and German languages, is a name which differs from all other names. Anyone who reflects in an appropriate manner on the nature of this name will find that it forms an avenue to the understanding of the human being in the deeper sense. Any other name can be applied to its corresponding object by all men in the same way. Anybody can call a table "table" or a chair "chair," but this is not so with the name I. No one can use it in referring to another person; each one can call only himself "I." Never can the name "I" reach my ears from outside when it refers to me. Only from within, only through itself, can the soul refer to itself as "I." When the human being therefore says "I" to himself, something begins to speak in him that has nothing to do with anyone of the worlds from which the "sheaths" so far mentioned are taken.

The I becomes ever more and more ruler of body and soul. This also comes to visible expression in the aura. The more the I is lord over body and soul, the more numerous and complex are its members, and the more varied and rich are the colors of the aura. This effect of the I on the aura can be seen by the "seeing" person. The I itself is invisible, even to him. This remains truly within the "veiled holy of holies of a man." But the I absorbs into itself the rays of the light which flames forth in a man as eternal light. As he gathers together the experiences of body and soul in the I, he also causes the thoughts of truth and goodness to stream into the I. The phenomena of the senses reveal themselves to the I from the one side, the spirit reveals itself from the other. Body and soul yield themselves up to the I in order to serve it; but the I yields itself up to the spirit in order that it may be filled by it. The I lives in body and soul; but the spirit lives in the I. And what there is of spirit in the I is eternal. For the I receives its nature and significance from that with which it is bound up. Inasmuch as it lives in the physical body, it is subject to the laws of the mineral world; through its ether-body to the laws of propagation and growth; by virtue of the sentient and intellectual souls to the laws of the soul world; in so far as it receives the spiritual into itself it is subject to the laws of the spirit. That which the mineral laws and the life laws construct comes into being and vanishes; but the spirit has nothing to do with becoming and perishing.

The I lives in the soul. Although the highest manifestation of the I belongs to the consciousness-soul, one must nevertheless say that this I, raying out from it, fills the whole of the soul, and through the soul affects the body. And in the I the spirit is alive. It rays into it and lives in it as in a "sheath" or veil, just as the I lives in its sheaths, the body and the soul. The spirit develops the I from within, outward; the mineral world develops it from without, inward. The spirit forming an I and living as I will be called spirit-self, because it manifests as the I, or ego, or "self" of man. ("Spirit-self" signifies the same as that which in theosophical literature is called "Higher manas." The Sanscrit word "manas" is related to the English word "man," and the German word "Mensch," and signifies the human being in so far as he is a spiritual being.) The difference between the "spirit-self" and the "consciousness-soul" can be made clear in the following way. The consciousness-soul is the bearer of the self-existent truth which is independent of all antipathy and sympathy, the spirit-self bears within it the same truth, but taken up into and enclosed by the I, individualized by the latter and absorbed into the independent being of the man. It is through the eternal truth becoming thus individualized and bound up into one being with the I, that the I itself attains to eternity.

The spirit-self is a revelation of the spiritual world within the I, just as from the other side sensations are a revelation of the physical world within the I. In that which is red, green, light, dark, hard, soft, warm, cold, one recognizes the revelations of the corporal world; in what is true and good, the revelations of the spiritual world. In the same sense in which the revelation of the corporal world is called sensation, let the revelation of the spiritual be called intuition. Even the most simple thought contains intuition, for one cannot touch it with the hands or see it with the eyes; one must receive its revelation from the spirit through the I. If an undeveloped and a developed man look at a plant, there lives in the I of the one something quite different from that which is in the ego of the other. And yet the sensations of both are called forth by the same object. The difference lies in this, that the one can make far more perfect thoughts about the object than the other can. If objects revealed themselves through sensation alone, there could be no progress in spiritual development. Even the savage is affected by nature, but the laws of nature reveal themselves only to the thoughts, fructified by intuition, of the more highly developed man. The excitations from the outer world are felt even by the child as incentives to the will; but the commandments of the morally good disclose themselves to him in the course of his development only as he learns to live in the spirit and understand its revelations.

Just as there could be no color sensations without physical eyes, there could be no intuitions without the higher thinking of the spirit-self. And as little as sensation creates the plant on which the color appears, does intuition create the spiritual realities about which it is merely giving information.

The I of man, which comes to life in the soul, draws in messages from above, from the spirit world through intuitions, just as through sensations it draws in messages from the physical world. By doing this it makes the spirit world the individualized life of its own soul, even as it does the physical world by means of the senses. The soul, or the I flaming forth in it, opens its portals on two sides, toward the corporal and toward the spiritual. Now as just the physical world can only give information about itself to the ego, because it builds out of physical materials and forces a body in which the conscious soul can live and possess organs for perceiving the corporal world outside itself, so the spiritual world builds, with its spiritual materials and spiritual forces, a spirit-body in which the I can live and through intuitions perceive the spiritual. (It is evident that the expression spirit-body contains a contradiction, according to the literal meaning of the word. It is only to be used in order to direct attention to what, in the spiritual regions, corresponds to the body of man in the physical.)

Just as within the physical world each human body is built up as a separate being, so is the spirit-body within the spirit world. In the spirit world there is for man an inner and an outer, just as there is in the physical world. As man takes in the materials of the physical world around him and assimilates them within his physical body, so does he take the spiritual from the spiritual environment and make it into his own. The spiritual is the eternal nourishment of man. And as man is born of the physical world, he is also born of the spirit through the eternal laws of the True and the Good. He is separated from the spirit world outside of him, as he is separated from the whole physical world, as an independent being. This independent spiritual being will be called spirit-man. (It is the same as that which is called Atma in theosophical literature.)

If we examine the human physical body, we find the same materials and forces in it as we find outside it in the rest of the physical world. It is the same with the spirit-man. In it pulsate the elements of the external spirit world. In it the forces of the rest of the spirit world are active. As a being within the physical skin becomes a self-contained entity, living and feeling, so also in the spirit world. The spiritual skin which separates the spirit man from the uniform spirit world makes him an independent being within it, living a life within himself and perceiving intuitively the spiritual content of the world. This "spiritual skin" will be called spirit-sheath. (In theosophical literature it is called auric sheath.) It must be kept clearly in mind that the spiritual skin expands continually with the advancing human evolution, so that the spiritual individuality of man (his auric sheath) is capable of enlargement to an unlimited extent.
The spirit-man lives within this spirit-sheath. It is built up by the spiritual life-force in the same way as is the physical body by the physical life-force. In a similar way to that in which one speaks of an ether-body one must therefore speak of an ether-spirit in reference to the spirit-man. Let this ether-spirit be called life-spirit. The spiritual being of man therefore is composed of three parts, spirit-man, life-spirit, and spirit-self. (Atma, budhi, manas are the corresponding expressions in theosophical literature. For Budhi is the separated special life-spirit which is formed by the spiritual life-force, or Budhi.)

For him who is a "seer" in the spiritual regions, this spiritual being of man is a perceptible reality as the higher, truly spiritual part of the aura. He "sees" the spirit-man as life-spirit within the spirit-sheath, and he "sees" how this "life-spirit" grows continually larger by taking in spiritual nourishment from the spiritual external world. Further, he sees how the spirit-sheath continually increases, widens out through what is brought into it, and how the spirit-man becomes ever larger and larger. For the difference between the spiritual and the physical being of man is that the latter has a limited size while the former can grow to an unlimited extent. Whatever of spiritual nourishment is absorbed has an eternal worth. The human aura is accordingly composed of two interpenetrating parts. Color and form are given to the one by the physical existence of man, and to the other by his spiritual existence. The ego forms the separation between them in this way that, while the physical after its own manner gives itself to building up a body which allows a soul to live and expand in it, and the ego gives itself to allowing to live and develop in it the spirit which now for its part permeates the soul and gives it the goal in the spirit world. Through the body the soul is enclosed in the physical; through the spirit-man there grow wings for its moving in the spiritual world.

In order to comprehend the whole man, one must think of him as formed of the components above mentioned. The body builds itself up out of the world of physical matter in such a way that the construction is adapted to the requirements of the thinking ego. It is penetrated with life-force, and thereby becomes the ether or life-body. As such it opens itself through the sense organs toward the outer world and becomes the soul-body. This the sentient-soul permeates and becomes one with. The sentient-soul does not merely receive the impacts of the outer world as sensations. It has its own inner life which it fructifies through thinking on the one hand, as it does through sensations on the other. In this way it becomes the intellectual-soul. It is able to do this by opening itself up to intuitions from above, as it does to sensations from below. Thus it becomes the consciousness-soul. This is possible to it because the spirit world builds into it the organ of intuition, just as the physical body builds in it the sense organs. As the senses transmit sensations by means of the soul-body, the spirit transmits to it intuitions through the organ of intuition. The spirit-man is therefore linked into a unity with the consciousness-soul, just as the physical body is with the sentient-soul in the soul-body. Consciousness-soul and spirit-self form a unity. In this unity the spirit-man lives as life-spirit, just as the ether body forms the bodily life-basis for the soul-body. And as the physical body is enclosed in the physical skin, so is the spirit-man in the spirit-sheath. The members of the whole man are as follows:
The "I" flashes forth in the soul, receives the infusion from out the spirit and thereby becomes the bearer of the spirit-man. Through this, man participates in the "three worlds," the physical, the soul, and the spiritual. He takes root in the physical world through his physical body, ether-body, and soul-body and flowers through the spirit-self, life-spirit, and spirit-man up into the spiritual world. The stalk, however, which takes root in the one and flowers in the other, is the soul itself.

One can express this arrangement of the members of man in a simplified way, but one entirely consistent with the above. Although the human I flashes forth in the consciousness-soul, it nevertheless penetrates the whole soul-being. The parts of this soul-being are not as distinctly separate as are the limbs of the body; they penetrate each other, in a higher sense. If then, one hold clearly in view the intellectual-soul and the consciousness-soul as the two members united to form the bearer of the I, and this I as their kernel, one can divide man into physical body, life-body, astral-body, and I. The expression astral-body designates here what is formed by soul-body and sentient-soul together, although the sentient-soul is in a certain respect energized by the I. When now the I penetrates itself with spirit-self, this spirit-self comes into evidence in the transmutation of the astral-body by a force within the soul. In the astral-body there are primarily active the impulses, desires, and passions of man, in so far as they are felt by him; the physical perceptions also take effect in it. Physical perceptions arise through the soul-body as a member in man which comes to him from the external world. Impulses, desires, and passions, etc., arise in the sentient-soul, in so far as it is energized by the soul before the latter has yielded itself to the spirit. If the I penetrates itself with spirit-self, the soul proceeds to energize the astral-body with this spirit-self. This expresses itself in the illumination of the impulses, desires, and passions by what the I has received from the spirit. The I has then, through the power it gains as partaker of the spiritual world, become ruler in the world of impulses, desires, etc. In proportion to the extent to which it has become this the spirit-self appears in the astral-body. And the astral-body becomes thereby transmuted. The astral-body itself then becomes visible as a two-membered body, an untransmuted and a transmuted. One can therefore designate the spirit-self, as manifested in man, as transmuted astral-body.
A similar process takes place in a person when he receives the life spirit into his I. The Life-body then becomes transmuted. It becomes penetrated with the life-spirit. And the Life-spirit reveals itself in that the life-body becomes quite other than it was. For this reason one can also say that life-spirit is transmuted life-body. And if the I receives the spirit-man, it thereby receives the strong force with which to penetrate the physical body. Naturally, that part of the physical body thus transmuted is not perceptible to the physical senses. It is, in fact, just that part of the physical body which has been spiritualized that has become the spirit-man.
The physical body is then present to the physical senses as physical, and in so far as this physical is spiritualized, it has to be perceived by spiritual faculties of perception. To the external senses the physical, even when penetrated by the spiritual, appears to be merely sensible.
their peculiar perfume is the chief association with spices, so sorcery is allied in every memory to gypsies. And as it has not escaped many poets that there is something more strangely sweet and mysterious in the scent of cloves than in that of flowers, so the attribute of inherited magic power adds to the romance of these picturesque wanderers. Both the spices and the Romany come from the far East—the fatherland of divination and enchantment. The latter have been traced with tolerable accuracy, If we admit their affinity with the Indian Dom and Domar, back to the threshold of history, or well-nigh into prehistoric times, and in all ages they, or their women, have been engaged, as if by elvish instinct, in selling enchant. merits, peddling prophecies and palmistry, and dealing with the devil generally ill a small retail way. As it was of old so it is to-day—
It is no great problem ill ethnology or anthropology as to how gypsies became fortune-tellers. We may find a very curious illustration of it in the wren. This is apparently as humble, modest, prosaic little fowl as exists, and as far from mystery and wickedness as an old hen. But the ornithologists of the olden time, and the myth-makers, and the gypsies who lurked and lived in the forest, knew better. They saw how this bright-eyed, strange little creature in her elvish way slipped in and out of hollow trees and wood shade into sunlight, and anon was gone, no man knew whither, and so they knew that it was an uncanny creature, and told wonderful tales of its deeds in human form, and to-day it is called by gypsies in Germany, as in England, the witch-bird, or more briefly, chorihani, "the witch." Just so the gypsies themselves, with their glittering Indian eyes, slipping like the wren in and out of the shadow of the Unknown, and anon away and invisible, won for themselves the name which now they wear. Wherever Shamanism, or the sorcery which is based on exorcising or commanding spirits, exists, its professors from leading strange lives, or from solitude or wandering, become strange and wild-looking. When men have this appearance people associate with it mysterious power. This is the case in Tartary, Africa, among the Eskimo, Lapps, or Red Indians, with all of whom the sorcerer, voodoo or medaolin, has the eye of the "fascinator," glittering and cold as that of a serpent. So the gypsies, from the mere fact of being wanderers and out-of-doors livers in wild places, became wild-looking, and when asked if they did not associate with the devils who dwell in the desert places, admitted the soft impeachment, and being further questioned as to whether their friends the devils, fairies, elves, and goblins had not taught them how to tell the future, they pleaded guilty, and finding that it paid well, went to work in their small way to improve their "science," and particularly their pecuniary resources. It was an easy calling; it required no property or properties, neither capital nor capitol, shiners nor shrines, wherein to work the oracle. And as I believe that a company of children left entirely to themselves would form and grow up with a language which in a very few years would be spoken fluently, 1 so I am certain that the shades of night, and fear, pain, and lightning and mystery would produce in the same time conceptions of dreaded beings, resulting first in demonology and then in the fancied art of driving devils away. For out of my own childish experiences and memories I retain with absolute accuracy material enough to declare that without any aid from other people the youthful mind forms for itself strange and seemingly supernatural phenomena. A tree or bush waving in the night breeze by moonlight is perhaps mistaken for a great man, the mere repetition of the sight or of its memory make it a personal reality. Once when I was a child powerful doses of quinine caused a peculiar throb in my ear which I for some time believed was the sound of somebody continually walking upstairs. Very young children sometimes imagine invisible playmates or companions talk with them, and actually believe that the unseen talk to them in return. I myself knew a small boy who had, as he sincerely believed, such a companion, whom he called Bill, and when he could not understand his lessons he consulted the mysterious William, who explained them to him. There are children who, by the voluntary or involuntary exercise of visual perception or volitional eye-memory, 2 reproduce or create images which they imagine to be real, and this faculty is much commoner than is supposed. In fact I believe that where it exists in most remarkable degrees the adults to whom the children describe their visions dismiss them as "fancies" or falsehoods. Even in the very extraordinary cases recorded by Professor HALE, in which little children formed for themselves spontaneously a language in which they conversed fluently, neither their parents nor anybody else appears to have taken the least interest in the matter. However, the fact being that babes can form for themselves supernatural conceptions and embryo mythologies, and as they always do attribute to strange or terrible-looking persons power which the latter do not possess, it is easy, without going further, to understand why a wild Indian gypsy, with eyes like a demon when excited, and unearthly-looking at his calmest, should have been supposed to be a sorcerer by credulous child-like villagers. All of this I believe might have taken place, or really did take place, in the very dawn of man's existence as a rational creature—that as soon as "the frontal convolution of the brain which monkeys do not possess," had begun with the "genial tubercule," essential to language, to develop itself, then also certain other convolutions and tubercules, not as yet discovered, but which ad interim I will call "the ghost-making," began to act. "Genial," they certainly were not—little joy and much sorrow has man got out of his spectro-facient apparatus—perhaps if it and talk are correlative he might as well, many a time, have been better off if he were dumb.

So out of the earliest time, in the very two o'clock of a misty morning in history, man came forth believing in non-existent terrors and evils as soon as he could talk, and talking about them as fast as he formed them. Long before the conception of anything good or beneficent, or of a Heavenly Father or benevolent angels came to him, he was scared with nightmares and spirits of death and darkness, hell, hunger, torture, and terror. We all know how difficult it is for many people when some one dies out of a household to get over the involuntary feeling that we shall unexpectedly meet the departed in the usual haunts. In almost every family there is a record how some one has "heard a voice they cannot hear," or the dead speaking in the familiar tones. Hence the belief in ghosts, as soon as men began to care for death at all, or to miss those who had gone. So first of all came terrors and spectres, or revenants, and from setting out food for the latter. which was the most obvious and childlike manner to please them, grew sacrifices to evil spirits, and finally the whole system of sacrifice in all its elaboration.

It may therefore be concluded that as soon as man began to think and speak and fear the mysterious, he also began to appease ghosts and bugbears by sacrifices. Then there sprung up at once—quite as early—the magus, or the cleverer man, who had the wit to do the sacrificing and eat the meats sacrificed, and explain that he had arranged it all privately with the dead and the devils. He knew all about them, and he could drive them away. This was the Shaman. He seems to have had a Tartar-Mongol-mongrel-Turanian origin, somewhere in Central Asia, and to have spread with his magic drum, and songs, and stinking smoke, exorcising his fiends all over the face of the earth, even as his descendant, General Booth, with his "devil-drivers" is doing at the present day. But the earliest authentic records of Shamanism are to be found in the Accadian, proto-Chaldæan and Babylon records. According to it all diseases whatever, as well as all disasters, were directly the work of evil spirits, which were to be driven away by songs of exorcism, burning of perfumes or evil-smelling drugs, and performing ceremonies, many of which, with scraps of the exorcisms are found in familiar use here and there at the present day. Most important of all in it was the extraordinary influence of the Shaman himself on his patient, for he made the one acted on sleep or wake, freed him from many apparently dire disorders in a minute, among others of epilepsies which were believed to be caused by devils dwelling in man—the nearest and latest explanation of which magic power is given in that very remarkable book, "Psycho-Therapeutics, or Treatment by Sleep and Suggestion," by C. LLOYD TUCKEY, M.D. (London: Bailliere and Co., 1889), which I commend to all persons interested in ethnology as casting light on some of the most interesting and perplexing problems of humanity, and especially of "magic."
It would seem, at least among the Laplanders, Finns, Eskimo, and Red Indians, that the first stage of Shamanism was a very horrible witchcraft, practised chiefly by women, in which attempts were made to conciliate the evil spirits; the means employed embracing everything which could revolt and startle barbarous men. Thus fragments of dead bodies and poison, and unheard-of terrors and crimes formed its basis. I think it very probable that this was the primitive religion among savages everywhere. An immense amount of it in its vilest conceivable forms still exists among negroes as Voodoo.

After a time this primitive witchcraft or voodooism had its reformers—probably brave and shrewd men, who conjectured that the powers of evil might be "exploited" to advantage. There is great confusion and little knowledge as yet as regards primitive man, but till we know better we may roughly assume that witch-voodooism was the religion of the people of the paleolithic period, if they could talk at all, since language is denied to the men of the Neanderthal, Canstadt, Egnisheim, and Podhava type. All that we can declare with some certainty is that we find the advanced Shamanism the religion of the early Turanian races, among whose descendants, and other people allied to them, it exists to this day. The grandest incident in the history of humanity is the appearance of the Man of Cromagnon. He it was who founded what M. DE QUATREFAGES calls "a magnificent race," probably one which speedily developed a high civilization, and a refined religion. But the old Shamanism with its amulets, exorcisms, and smoke, its noises, more or less musical, of drums and enchanted bells, and its main belief that all the ills of life came from the action of evil spirits, was deeply based among the inferior races and the inferior scions of the Cromagnon stock clung to it in forms more or less modified. just as the earlier witchcraft, or the worship and conciliation of evil, overlapped in many places the newer Shamanism, so the latter overlapped the beautiful Nature-worship of the early Aryans, the stately monotheism of the Shemites, and the other more advanced or ingenious developments of the idea of a creative cause. There are, in fact, even among us now, minds to whom Shamanism or even witchcraft is deeply or innately adapted by nature, and there are hundred of millions who, while professing a higher and purer doctrine, cling to its forms or essentials, believing that because the apparatus is called by a different name it is in no respect whatever the same thing. Finally there are men who, with no logical belief whatever in any kind of supernaturalism, study it, and love it, and are moved by it, owing to its endless associations, with poetry, art, and all the legends of infancy or youth. HEINE was not in his reasoning moments anything more or less than a strict Deist or Monotheist, but all the dreams and spectres, fairies and goblins, whether of the Middle Ages or the Talmud, were inexpressibly dear to him, and they move like myriad motes through the sunshine of his poetry and prose, often causing long rays when there were bars at the window—like that on which the saint hung his cloak. It is probable or certain that Shamanism (or that into which it has very naturally developed) will influence all mankind, until science, by absorbing man's love of the marvellous in stupendous discoveries shall so put to shame the old thaumaturgy, or wonder-working, that the latter will seem poor and childish. In all the "Arabian Nights" there is nothing more marvellous than the new idea that voices and sounds may be laid aside like real books, and made to speak and sing again years afterwards. And in all of that vast repertory of occult lore, "Isis Unveiled," there is nothing so wonderful as the simple truth that every child may be educated to possess an infinitely developed memory of words, sights, sounds, and ideas, allied to incredible quickness of perception and practice of the constructive faculties. These, with the vast fields of adjusting improved social relations and reforms—all of which in a certain way opens dazzling vistas of a certain kind of enchantment or brilliant hope—will go fast and far to change the old romance to a radically different state of feeling and association.

It is coming—let it come! Doubtless there was an awful romance of darkness about the old witchcraft which caused its worshippers to declare that the new lights of Shamanism could never dissipate it. just so many millions of educated people at present cannot be brought to understand that all things to which they are used are not based on immutable laws of nature, and must needs be eternal. They will find it hard to comprehend that there can ever be any kind of poetry, art, or sentiment, utterly different from that to which they and their ancestors have been accustomed. Yet it is clear and plain before them, this New Era, looking them directly in the face, about to usher in a reformation compared to which all the reformations and revolutions and new religions which the world has ever seen were as nothing; and the children are born who will see more than the beginning of it.

In the next chapter I will examine the Shamanic spells and charms still used among certain gypsies. For, be it observed, all the gypsy magic and sorcery here described is purely Shamanic—that is to say, of the most primitive Tartar type—and it is the more interesting as having preserved—from prehistoric times many of the most marked characteristics of the world's first magic or religion. It treats every disease, disorder, trouble, or affliction as the work of an evil spirit; it attempts to banish these influences by the aid of ceremonies, many of which, by the disgusting and singular nature of the ingredients employed, show the lingering influences of the black witchcraft which preceded Shamanism; and it invokes favourable supernatural agencies, such as the spirits of the air and Mashmurdalo', the giant of the forests. In addition to this there will be found to be clearly and unmistakably associated with all their usages, symbols and things nearly connected with much which is to be found in Greek, Roman, and Indian mythology or symbolism. Now whether this was drawn from "classic" sources, or whether all came from some ancient and obscure origin, cannot now be accurately determined. But it certainly cannot be denied that Folk-lore of this kind casts a great deal of light on the early history of mankind, and the gradual unfolding or evolution of religion and of mind, and that, if intelligently studied, this of the gypsies is as important as any chapter in the grand work.

The gypsies came, historically speaking, very recently from India. It has not been so carefully observed as it might that all Indians are not of the religion of Brahma, much less of Buddha or of Mahommed, and that among the lower castes, the primæval Altaic Shamanism, with even earlier witchcraft, still holds its own. Witchcraft, or Voodoo, or Obi, relies greatly on poisoning for its magic, and the first gypsies were said to poison unscrupulously. Even to this day there is but one word with them as with many Hindoos for both medicine and poison—id est drab. How exactly this form of witchcraft and Shamanism exists today in India appears from the following extract from The St. James's Gazette, September 8, 1888:—
In India, the jadoo-wallah, or exorcist, thrives apace; and no wonder, for is not the lower-caste Hindoo community bhut, or demon-ridden? Every village, graveyard, burning-ghat, has its special bhut or bhuts; and the jadoo-wallah is the earthly mediator between their bhutships and the common folk. The exorcist is usually the spiritual adviser to the population of a low-caste village, and is known as a gooroo, or priest: that is to say, he professes to hold commune with the spirits of defunct Hindoos which have qualified for their unique position in the other world—by their iniquity in this one, perhaps. Every Hindoo has a guardian bhut that requires propitiating, and the gooroo is the medium.

Amongst the Jaiswars and other low-caste Hindoos, caste is regulated by carnal pice, and a man is distinguished amongst them by a regulated monetary scale. One person may be a 14-anna caste man while another may only be a 12-anna caste man. Does the 12-anna caste man wish to supersede the 14-anna caste man, then he consults the gooroo, who will, in consideration of a certain contribution, promote him to a higher-caste grade. A moneyed man having qualms about his future state should join the Jaiswars, where at least he would have an opportunity of utilizing his spare cash for the good of his soul. The average gooroo will be only too glad to procure him everlasting glory for a matter of a few rupees.

The gooroo, then, serves as regulator of the lower-caste Hindoo, system. But it is our intention to exhibit him in his peculiar position of exorcist-general to the people. This will perhaps be best explained by an account of the case of one Kaloo. Kaloo was a grass-cutter, and had been offended by Kasi, a brother grass-cutter. Kasi, it appears, had stolen Kaloo's quilt one night during his temporary absence at a neighbouring liquor-shop. Kaloo, on his return, finding his quilt gone, raised the hue-and-cry; and Mooloo, the village policeman, traced the robbery to Kasi's hut. Yet, in spite of this damning proof, the village panchayet, or bench of magistrates, decided that, as Kaloo could not swear to the exact colour of his lost quilt—Kaloo was colour-blind—it could not possibly be his. Anyhow, Kaloo kept Kasi in view and hit upon a plan to do him a grievous bodily injury. Scraping together a few rupees, he went to the village gooroo and promised that worthy a reward if he would only exorcise the bhuts and get them to "make Kasi's liver bad." The gooroo, in consideration of five rupees cash, promised compliance. So that night we find the gooroo busy with sandal-wood and pig's blood propitiating the neighbouring bhuts. Needless to say that Kasi had in a very short space of time all the symptoms of liver complaint. Whether the bhuts gave Kasi a bad liver or the gooroo gave him a few doses of poison is a question. Anyhow, Kasi soon died. Another case in point is that of Akuti. Akuti was a retired courtesan who had long plied a profitable trade in the city. We find her, however, at her native village of Ramghur, the wife of one Balu. Balu soon got tired of his Akuti, and longed for the contents of her strong box wherein she kept her rupees, bracelets, nose-rings, and other valuables. This was a rather awkward matter for Balu, for Akuti was still in the prime of life. Balu accordingly visits the gooroo and wants Akuti's liver made bad. "Nothing easier," says the gooroo: "five rupees." Balu has reckoned without his host, however: for the gooroo, as general spiritual adviser to the Ramghur community, visits Akuti and tells her of Balu's little scheme. Naturally Balu's liver is soon in a decline, for Akuti's ten rupees were put in the opposite side of the gooroo's scales.

Knaves of the gooroo genus flourish in India, and when their disposition is vicious the damage they can do is appalling. That these priests exist and do such things as I have illustrated is beyond question. Ask any native of India his views on the bhut question, and he will tell you that there are such things, and, further, that the gooroo is the only one able to lay them, so to speak. According to the low-caste Hindoo, the bhut is a spiteful creature which requires constant supplies of liquor and pork; otherwise it will wreak its vengeance on the forgetful votary who neglects the supply. A strange idea, too, is this of pork being pleasing to the bhuts; but when it is remembered that the Jaiswars, Chamars, and other low-caste Hindoos are inordinately fond of that meat themselves, they are right in supposing pig to be the favourite dish of the bhuts, who, after all, are but the departed spirits of their own people. Naturally bhai (brother) Kaloo, or bahin (sister, English gypsy pen) Muti, the quondam grass-cutter and courtesan of Ramghur village, who in this life liked nothing better than a piece of bacon and a dram of spirits, will, in their state of bhuthood hanker after those things still. Acting on these notions of the people, the gooroo lives and thrives exceedingly.

Yet of all this there is nothing "Hindoo," nothing of the Vedas. It is all pre-Aryan, devil-worshipping, poisoning, and Turanian; and it is exactly like voodooing in Philadelphia or any other city in America. It is the old faith which came before all, which existed through and under Brahminism, Buddhism, and Mahommedanism, and which, as is well known, has cropped out again and flourishes vigorously under British toleration. And this is the faith which forms the basis of European gypsy sorcery, as it did of yore that of the Chaldæan and Etrurian, which still survive in the witchcraft of the Tuscan Romagna. Every gypsy who came to Europe a few centuries ago set up as a gooroo, and did his sorceries after the same antique fashion. Even to-day it is much the same, but with far less crime. But the bhut or malignant spirit is, under other names, still believed, in, still doctored by gypsies with herbs and smoke, and "be rhymed like an Irish rat," and conjured into holes bored in trees, and wafted away into running streams, and naively implored to "go where he is wanted," to where he was nursed, and to no longer bother honest folk who are tired of him. And for all this the confiding villager must pay the gypsy wise-woman "so much monies"—as it was in the beginning and is now in good faith among millions in Europe who are in a much better class of society. And from this point of view I venture to say that there is not a charm or spell set down in this work or extant which will not be deeply interesting to every sincere student of the history of culture. Let me, however, say in this beginning once for all that I have only given specimens sufficient to illustrate my views, for my prescribed limits quite forbid the introduction of all the gypsy cures, spells, &c., which I have collected.

THOUGH not liable to many disorders, the gypsies in Eastern Europe, from their wandering, out-of-doors life, and camping by marshes and pools where there is malaria, suffer a great deal from fevers, which in their simple system of medicine are divided into the shilale—i.e., chills or cold—and the tate shilalyi, "hot-cold," or fever and ague. For the former, the following remedy is applied: Three lungs and three livers, of frogs are dried and powdered and drunk in spirits, after which the sick man or woman says
Frogs in my belly
Devour what is bad
Frogs in my belly
Show the evil the way out!"

By "the evil" is understood evil spirits. According to the old Shamanic belief, which was the primæval religion of all mankind, every disease is caused by an evil spirit which enters the body and can only be driven out by magic. We have abundant traces of this left in our highest civilization and religion among people who gravely attribute every evil to the devil instead of the unavoidable antagonisms of nature. Nothing is more apparent in the New Testament than that all diseases were anciently regarded as coming from devils, or evil occult, spiritual influences, their negative or cure being holiness in some form. This the Jews, if they did not learn it from the Assyrians in the first place, had certainly studied deeply in Babylon, where it formed the great national cult. "It was the devil put it into my head," says the criminal; and there is not a point of this old sorcery which is not earnestly and seriously advocated by the Roman Catholic Church and the preachers of the Salvation Army. Among the American Red Indians the idea of evil spirits is carried to logical extremes. If a pen drops from our fingers, or a penny rolls from our grasp, the former of course falls on our new white dress, while the latter nine times out of ten goes directly to the nearest grating, or crack or rat-hole. I aver that it is literally true, if I ever search for a letter or paper it is almost always at the bottom of the rest, while ink-wipers and pens seem to be endowed with more than mere instinct or reason—they manifest genius in concealing themselves. The Indians having observed this have come to the conclusion that it is all the work of certain busy little mischievous goblins, in which I, to a certain extent, agree with them, holding, however, that the dwelling-place of these devilkins, is in our own brain. What are our dreams but the action of our other mind, or a second Me in my brain? Certainly it is with no will or effort, or act of mine, that I go through a diabolical torturing nightmare, or a dreadful dream, whose elaborate and subtle construction betrays very often more ingenuity than I in my waking hours possess. I have had philosophical and literary dreams, the outlines of which I have often remembered waking, which far transcended anything of the kind which I could ever hope to write. The maker of all this is not I or my will, and he is never about, or on hand, when I am self-conscious. But in the inadvertent moments of oblivion, while writing, or while performing any act, this other I, or I's, (for there may be a multitude of them for aught I know) step in and tease—even as they do in dreams. Now the distinction between this of subjective demons acting objectively, and objective or outside spirits, is really too fine to be seen even by a Darwinian-Carpenterian-Häeckelite, and therefore one need not be amazed that PIEL SABADIS or TOMAQUAH, of the Passamaquoddy tribe, or OBEAH GUMBO of New Orleans, should, with these experiences, jump at ghosts and "gobblers," is not to be wondered at; still less that they should do something to conciliate or compel these haunting terrors, or "buggs," as they were once called—whence bogeys. It is a fact that if one's ink-wipers get into the habit of hiding all we have to do is to deliberately destroy them and get others, or at least watch them carefully, and they will soon be cured of wandering. On the other hand, sacrifices to conciliate and please naturally occur, and the more expensive these are the better are they supposed to be. And as human beings were of old the most valuable property, they were as naturally supposed to be most acceptable to the gods, or, by the monotheists, to God. A West Indian voodoo on being reproached for human sacrifices to the serpent, and for eating the bodies slain, replied, "Do you believe that the Son of God was sacrificed to save man, and do you not eat what your priests say is His very body?" So difficult is it to draw distinctions between that which is spiritual and the mockeries which appear to be such!

The scape-goat, or sufferer, who is martyred that many may escape—or in other words, the unfortunate minority—is a natural result of sacrifice. There is a curious trace of it in Hungarian Gypsy Shamanism. On Easter Monday they make a wooden box or receptacle which is called the bìcáben, pronounced like the English gypsy word bitchapen and meaning the same, that is—a sending, a thing sent or gift. In this, at the bottom, are two sticks across, "as in a cradle," and on these are laid herbs and other fetish stuff which every one touches with the finger; then the whole is enveloped in a winding of white and red wool, and carried by the oldest person of the tribe from tent to tent; after which it is borne to the next running stream and left there, after every one has spat upon it. By doing this they think that all the diseases and disorders which would have befallen them during the coming year are conjured into the box. But woe to him who shall find the box and open it, instead of throwing it at once into the stream! All the diseases exorcised by the gypsy band will fall upon him and his in full measure.

It would be an interesting question to know how many good people there are, let us say in London, who, if they had all opportunity to work off all their colds, gouts, scarlet-fevers, tooth- head- and stomach-aches, with the consequent doctors' bills, or all suffering and expenses, on some other family by means of secret sorcery, would or would not "try it on"? It is curious to observe the resemblance of the gypsy ceremony., with its box full of mischief, and the Jewish goat; not forgetting the red wool handed down from heathen sacrifice and sorcery of old. In the Bible white wool is the symbol of purification (Isaiah i. 18). The feet of the statues of the gods were enveloped in wool—Dü laneos habent pedes—to signify that they are slow to avenge, if sure. It is altogether an interesting object, this gypsy casket, and one would like to know what all the channels were through which the magic ran ere it carne to them.

Another cure against the fever is to go to a running stream and cast pieces of wood nine times backwards into the running water, repeating the rhymes:—

"Shilályi prejiá,
Páñori me tut 'dáv!
Náñi me tut kámáv
Andakode prejiá,
Odoy tut čučiden,
Odoy tut ferinen,
Odoy tut may kámen
Mashurdalo sastyár!"

Fever go away from me,
I give it, water, unto thee
Unto me thou art not dear,
Therefore go away from here
To where they nursed thee,
Where they shelter thee,
Where they love thee,
Mashurdalo—help!"

This is a very remarkable invocation which takes us into true heathenism. Mâshurdálo, or, correctly speaking, Mâshmurdálo (it would be Mâsmérdo in English gypsy), means meat-killer. He is a sylvan giant—he has his hold by wode and wolde as outlawes wont to do, in faraway forests and lonely rocky places, where he lurks to catch beast and men in order to devour them. It is needless to say to those who are aware that the taste of white people's flesh is like that of very superior chicken, and a negro's something much better than grouse, that Mâshmurdálo prefers, like a simple, unsophisticated savage as he is, men to animals. Like the German peasant who remarked, "It's all meat, anyhow," when he found a mouse in his soup, Mâshmurdálo is not particular. He is the guardian of great treasures; like most men in the "advance business" he knows where the "money" is to be found—unlike them he is remarkably stupid, and can be easily cheated of his valuables. But if anybody does this Morgante a service he is very grateful, and aids his benefactor either with a loan or with his enormous strength. In many respects he bears a remarkable resemblance to two giants in the American Algonkin mythology, especially to At-was-kenni ges—the Spirit of the Forest—who is equally powerful, good-natured, and stupid, and to the Chenoo, who is a cannibal giant and yet grateful to friends, and also to several Hindoo gods. The gypsies have here evidently fused several Oriental beings into one., This is a process which occurs in the decline of mythologies as in languages. In the infancy of a speech, as in its old age, many words expressing different ideas, but which sound somewhat alike, become a single term. In English gypsy I have found as many as eight or ten Hindi words thus concentrated into one.

Another cure for a fever. The sufferer goes in the forest and finds a young tree. When the first rays of the rising sun fall on it the patient shakes it with all his might and exclaims:—

"Shilályi, shilályi prejia
Káthe tu beshá, káthe tu beshá!

"Fever, fever, go away!
Here shalt thou stay. Here shalt thou stay!"

It is here plain that the shaking the sapling is intended to transfer the shakes, as the chill and shuddering of the fever is called in America, to the tree.

"Then the fever passes into the tree." Perhaps it was in this way that the aspen learned to tremble. But among the gypsies in the south of Hungary, among whom the vaccination or inoculation of trees is greatly the fashion, a hole is bored into the wood, into which the patient spits thrice, repeats the spell, and then stops the hole with a plug. The boring of holes in trees or transferring illness to them is also practised without formulas of speech. Thus, if while a man is lying down or sitting in the spring he hears the song of the cuckoo he believes that he will be ill all the time for a year to come, especially with fevers, unless he goes. nine times to a tree, bores a hole in it, and spits into it three times. Then he is safe. In German mythology "the cuckoo is a bird which brings bad luck" (FRIEDRICH), and the inhabitants of Haiterbach were so persuaded of this that they introduced a prayer against it into their church service, whence they got the name of cuckoos (WOLF, "Zeitschrift für Deutsche Myth," Vol. i. p. 440). It announces to men the infidelity of wives, and tells listeners how many years they have to live.

It is possible that this is a relic of an old form of sacrifice, or proof that the idea occurs to all men of thus making a casket of a tree. The occasional discovery of stone axe-heads in very old trees in America renders this probable. And where the wood grows up and encloses the object it would very rarely happen that it would ever be discovered. It should be added to the previous instance that when they have closed the hole, the Transylvanian gypsies eat some of the bark of the next tree.

Another cure for fever is effected by going in the morning before sunrise to the bank of a stream, and digging a hole with some object—for instance, a knife—which has never been used. Into this hole the patient makes water, then fills up the hole, saying:—

"Shilályi áč kathe
Ná ává kiyá mánge!
Sutyárá andré čik!
Avá kiyá mánge
Káná káthe ná hin páñi!"

"Fever stay here!
Do not come to me!
Dry up in dust,
Come unto me
When no water is here."

Dr. WLISLOCKI translates this last line, "When there is no more water in the river," which is certainly what is meant. "While water runs or grass grows," &c. is a formula common to ail countries. Another cure for fever is this: the patient must take a kreutzer, an egg, and a handful of salt, and before sunrise go with them to a cross-road, throw them away backwards, and repeat:—

"Káná ádálá kiyá mánge áven
Âvâ tu kiyâ mánge shilályi."

"When these things again I see,
Fever then return to me."

Or literally, "When these things to me come." For the next three days the invalid must not touch money, eggs, or salt. There is an old MS. collection of English charms and ceremonies, professedly of "black witchcraft," in which we are told that if a girl will walk stark-naked by the light of the full moon round a field or a house, and cast behind her at every step a handful of salt, she will get the lover whom she desires. Salt, says MORESINUS, was sacred to the infernal deities, and it was a symbol of the soul, or of life, because it preserved the body while in it (PITISCUS, "Leg. Ant. Rom." ii. p. 675). The devil never eats salt. Once there was in Germany a peasant who had a witch for a wife, and the devil invited them to supper. But all the dishes were without any seasoning, and the peasant, despite all nudges and hints to hold his tongue kept crying for salt. And when it was brought and he said, "Thank God, here is salt at last!" the whole Spuck, or ghastly scene, vanished (HORST, "Dæmonomagie," Frankfurt, 1818, vol. ii. p. 213). For a great deal of further information and symbolism on and of salt, including all the views of the ancient Rabbis and modern rationalists on the subject of Lot's wife, the reader may consult "Symbolik und Mythologie der Natur," by J. B. FRIEDRICH, Wurzburg, 1859: "Salt is put into love-philtres and charms to ensure the duration of an attachment; in some Eastern countries it is carried in a little bag as an amulet to preserve health."

Another cure for fever. The patient must drink, from a new jug, water from three brooks, and after every drink throw into the running stream a handful of salt. Then he must make water into the first and say—

"Káthe hin t'ro sherro!"

"Here is thy head!"

At the second he repeats the sacred ceremony and murmurs

"Káthe hin t'ro perá!"

"Here is thy belly!"

And again at the third he exclaims
"And here are thy feet.
Go now into the water!"

But while passing from one stream to another he must not look back once, for then he might behold the dread demon of the fever which follows him, neither must he open his mouth, except while uttering the charm, for then the fever would at once enter his body again through the portal thus left unclosed. This walking on in apprehension of beholding the ugly spectre will recall to the reader a passage in the "Ancient Mariner," of the man who walks in fear and dread,

"Nor turns around his head,
For well he knows a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread."

The wise wives among the gypsies in Hungary have many kinds of miraculous salves for sale to cure different disorders. These they declare are made from the fat of dogs, bears, wolves, frogs, and the like. As in all fetish remedies they are said to be of strange or revolting materials, like those used by Canidia of yore, the witches of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, and of Burns in Tam O'Shanter.

When a man has been "struck by a spirit" there results a sore swelling or boil, which is cured by a sorceress as follows: The patient is put into a tent by himself, and is given divers drinks by his attendant then she rubs the sufferer with a salve, the secret of which is known only to her, while she chants
Begone, begone, begone
To the Evil One; stay there.
May thirty snakes devour thee,
Thirty dogs tear thee,
Thirty cocks swallow thee!"

After this she slaughters a black hen, splits it open, and lays it on the boil. Then the sufferer must drink water from three springs or rivulets, and throw wood nine times into the fire daily until he is well. But black hens cost money, according to WLISLOCKI; albeit the gypsies, like the children of the Mist in "Waverley," are believed to be acquainted with a far more economical and direct method of obtaining such commodities. Therefore this expensive and high-class cure is not often resorted to, and when it is the sorceress generally substitutes something cheaper than poultry. It may be here observed that the black hen occurs frequently in mediæval witch-lore and legend as a demon-symbol (WOLF, "Niederländische Sagen," pp. 647, 650). Thus the bones of sorcerors turn into black hens and chickens, and it is well if your black hen dies, for if she had not you would have perished in her place. Black hens were walled up in castles as sacrifices to the devil, that the walls might long endure; hence the same fowl occurs in the arms of the family of Henneberg (NORK, "Mythologie der Volksagen," p. 381). The lore on this subject is very extensive.

The following remedy against headache is in general use among Transylvanian gypsies. The patient's head is rubbed, and then washed, with vinegar or hot water while the following charm is repeated Oh, pain in my head,
The father of all evil,
Look upon thee now!
Thou hast greatly pained me,
Thou tormentest my head,
Remain not in me!
Go thou, go thou, go home,
Whence thou, Evil One, didst suck,
Thither, thither hasten!
Who treads upon my shadow,
To him be the pain!"

It will be seen that the principle of treading on the tail of the coat practised in Ireland is much outdone by the gypsies who give a headache to any one who so much as treads on their shadows. And it is not difficult to understand that, as with children, the rubbing the head, the bathing it with warm water or vinegar, and, finally, the singing a soothing song, may all conduce to a cure. The readers of "Helen's Babies" will remember the cures habitually wrought on Budge by singing to him, "Charley boy one day." Gypsies are in many respects mere children, or little Budges. There can be no doubt that where faith is very strong, and imagination is lively, cures which seem to border on the miraculous are often effected—and this is, indeed, the basis of all miracle as applied to relieving bodily afflictions. All of this may be, if not as yet fully explained by physiology, at least shown to probably rest on a material basis. But no sound system of cure can be founded on it, because there is never any certainty, especially for difficult and serious disorders, that they can ever be healed twice in succession. The "faith" exacted is sometimes a purely hereditary gift, at other times merely a form of blind ignorance and credulity. It may vividly influence all the body, and it may fail to act altogether. But the "Faith Healer" and "Christian Scientist," or "Metaphysical Doctor," push boldly on, and when they here and there heal a patient once, it is published to the four winds as a proof of invariable infallibility. And as everybody believes that he has "faith," so he hopes to be cured. In popular custom for a man to say he believes in anything, and to be sure that he really has nothing against it, constitutes as much "faith" as most men understand. A man may be utterly destitute of any moral principle and yet live in a constant state of "faith" and pious conviction. Here the capacity for cure by means of charms is complete.

In connection with these charms for the head we may find not less interesting those in reference to the hair, as given by the same authority, Dr. von WLISLOCKI. The greatest pains are taken to ensure even for the new-born child what is called a full head, because every one who dies bald is turned into a fish, and must remain in this form till he has collected as many hairs as would make an ordinary wig. But this lasts a long time, since he can find but a single hair every month or moon. The moon is in many ways connected in gypsy faith with the hair. He who sleeps bare-headed in its light will lose his hair, or else it will become white. To have a heavy growth a man must scoop up with his left hand water from a running brook, against the current, and pour it on his head.

Immediately after the first bathing of a newly-born child, and its anointing, its forehead and neck are marked with a semicircle—perhaps meant to indicate the moon—made with a salve called barcali, intended to promote the growth of the hair. A brew, or mess, is made from beans and the blood of a cow. Hairs are taken from the heads of the father and mother, which hairs are burnt to a powder and mixed with the brew. It is remarkable that the beans are only used for a boy, their object being to insure for him great virile or sexual power. "The bean," says FRIEDRICH ("Sym. d. N."), "is an erotic symbol, or one signifying sexual pleasure." Hence it was forbidden to the Egyptian priests, the Pythagoreans, the priests of Jupiter in Rome, and to the Jewish high priests on certain festivals. But if the child is a girl, the seeds of the pumpkin or sunflower are substituted for beans, because the latter would make her barren.

It is an old belief, and one widely spread, that if the witches or the devil can get a lock of anybody's hair, they can work him evil. The gypsies have the following articles of faith as regards hairs:—

Should birds find any, and build them into their nests, the man who lost them will suffer from headaches until, during the wane of the moon, he rubs his head with the yolk of eggs and washes it clean in running water. It would be very curious if this method of cleaning the hair and giving it a soft gloss, so much in vogue among English ladies, should have originated in sorcery. Beyond this, the sufferer must mix some of his hairs with food and give them to a white dog to eat.

If hairs which have fallen or been cut away are found by a snake and carried into its hole, the man from whom they came will continue to lose more until those in the snake's nest are quite decayed.

If you see human hairs in the road do not tread on them, since, in that case, if they came from a lunatic, you, too, will go mad. According to MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS, if you pick up some hairs in the road just before entering a city gate, tie one to your own head, and, throwing the rest away, walk on without looking behind you, you can cure a headache. I have found nearly the same charm for the same purpose in Florence, but accompanied by the incantation which is wanting in MARCELLUS. Also his cure for headache with ivy from the head of a statue, which is still used in Tuscany with the incantation which the Roman omits.

Finding a hair hanging to your coat, carefully burn it, since you may by so doing escape injury by witchcraft. And we may remark in confirmation of this, that when you see a long hair on a man's coat it is an almost certain sign that he has been among the witches, or is bewitched; as the Countess thought when she found one clinging to the button of her lover, Von Adelstein, as set forth in "Meister Karl's Sketch-book."

But to bewitch your enemy get some of his combed-out hair, steep it in your own water, and then throw it on his garments. Then he will have no rest by night or day. I have observed that in all the Tuscan charms intended to torment a foe, the objects employed are like this of a disgusting nature.

If a wife will hold her husband to her in love, she must take of her own hair and bind it to his. This must be done three times by full moonlight.

Or if a maid will win the love of a young man, she must take of her own hair, mix it with earth from his footsteps—"und mischt diese mit dem Speichel einer läufigen Hundinn auf"—burn the whole to powder, and so manage that the victim shall eat it—which, it is needless to say, it is not likely that he will do, knowing what it is. Earth from the footsteps of any one is regarded as a very powerful means of bewitching him in Italian and ancient sorcery.

If a man bind the combings of his hair to the mane of a strange horse it will be wild and shy till the hairs are removed.

For easy childbirth red hair is sewed in a small bag and carried on the belly next the skin during pregnancy. Red hair indicates good luck, and is called bálá kámeskro, or sun-hairs, which indicates its Indian origin.

If any one dreams much of the dead, let him sew some of his hair into an old shoe, and give it to any beggar. Thereby he will prevent evil spirits from annoying him.

If a child suffers from sleeplessness, some of its mother's hair should be sewed into its wrappings, and others pulverized, mixed with a decoction of elderberries, be given it to drink. In German Folk-lore, as I shall show more fully anon, the elder often occurs as a plant specially identified with sorcery. In gypsy it is called yakori bengeskro, or the devil's eye, from its berries.

Nails cut on Friday should be burned, and the ashes mingled with the fodder of cattle, who are thus ensured against being stolen or attacked by wild beasts. If children are dwarfish, the same ashes in their food will make them grow. If a child suffers from pains in the stomach, a bit of nail must be clipped from its every finger; this is mixed with the dried dung of a foal, and the patient exposed to the smoke while it is burned.

A child's first tooth must, when it falls out, be thrown into a hollow tree. Those which come out in the seventh year are carefully kept, and whenever the child suffers from toothache, one is thrown into a stream.

Teeth which have been buried for many years, serve to make a singular fetish. They are mingled with the bones of a tree-frog, and the whole then sewed up in a little bag. If a man has anything for sale, and will draw or rub this bag over it, he will have many offers or customers for the articles thus enchanted. The bones are prepared by putting the frog into a glass or earthen receptacle full of small holes. This is buried in an ant-hill. The ants enter the holes and eat away all the flesh, leaving the bones which after a few weeks are removed. 1

To bear healthy and strong children women wear a string of bears' claws and children's teeth. Dr. von WLISLOCKI cites, apropos of this, a passage from JACOBUS RUEFF, "Von Empfengnussen": "Etlich schwanger wyber pflägend einen bären klauen von einem bären tapen yngefaszet am hals zuo tragen" (Some women when with child are accustomed to wear mounted bears' claws on their necks). In like manner boars' teeth, which much resemble them, are still very commonly worn in Austria and Italy and almost over all Europe and the East. It is but a few days since I here, in Florence, met with a young English lady who had bought a very large one mounted in silver as a brooch, but who was utterly unaware that there was any meaning attached to it. 1 I have a very ancient bear's tooth and whistle in silver, meant for a teething child. It came from Munich.

Pain in the eyes is cured with a wash made of spring or well water and saffron. During the application the following is recited Oh, pain from the eyes
Go into the water,
Go out of the water
Into the saffron,
Go out of the saffron
Into the earth.
To the Earth-Spirit.
There's thy home.
There go and eat."

This incantation casts light upon the earliest Shamanic remedies. When it was discovered that certain herbs really possessed curative qualities, this was attributed to inherent magic virtues. The increase of their power by combining them with water, or mingling them, was due to mystic affinities by which a spirit passed from one to another. The Spirit of Earth went into saffron, that of saffron into water. The magician thus, by a song sent the pain into its medical affinity, and so on back to the source whence it came. From early times saffron, as one of the earliest flowers of spring, owing to its colour, was consecrated to magic and love. Eos, the goddess of the Aurora, was called κροκοτιεπλο?<υ?>σ? {Greek krokotieplos}, the one with the saffron garment. Therefore the public women wore a yellow robe. Even in Christian symbolism it meant love, as PORTALIS declares: "In the Christian religion the colours saffron and orange were the symbols of God embracing the heart and illuminating the souls of the faithful" ("Des Couleurs Symboliques," Paris, 1837, p. 240). So we can trace the chain from the prehistoric barbarous Shamanism, preserved by the gypsies, to the Greek, and from the Greek to the mediæval form still existent.

The same sympathetic process of transmission may be traced in the remedy for the erysipelas. The blood of a bullfinch is put into a new vessel with scraped elder-bark, and then laid on a cloth with which the eyes are bound up overnight. Meanwhile the patient repeats I have two eyes,
I have two feet,
Pain from my eyes
Go into my feet!
Go from my feet,
Go into the earth
Go from the earth
Into death!"

We have here in the elder-bark associations of magic which are ancient and widely spread, and which still exist; for at the present day country people in New England attribute to it curative virtues which it really does not possess. From the earliest times among the Northern races the Lady Elder, as we may learn from the Edda, or FIN MAGNUSEN ("Priscæ veterum Borealium Mythologiæ Lexicon," pp. 21, 239), and NYERUP ("Worterbuch der Scandinavischen Mythologie"), had an unearthly, ghostly reputation. Growing in lonely, gloomy places its form and the smell of its flowers seemed repulsive, so that it was associated with death, and some derived its name from Frau Holle, the sorceress and goddess of death. But SCHWENKI ("Mythologie der Slaven") with more probability traces it from hohl, i.e., hollow, and as spirits were believed to dwell in all hollow trees, they were always in its joints. The ancient Lithuanians, he informs us, worshipped their god Puschkeit, who was a form of Pluto, in fear and trembling at dusk, and left their offerings under the elder-tree. Everybody has seen the little puppets made of a piece of elder-pith with half a bullet under them, so that they always stand upright, and jump up when thrown down. Among the Slovaks these seem to have had some magical application. Perhaps their priests persuaded them that these jumping Jacks were miraculous, for they called them Pikuljk, a name derived from Peklo, the under-world. They still believe in a Pikuljk, who is a servant of the Evil One. He does all kinds of favours for men, but ends by getting their souls. The ancestors of the Poles were accustomed to bury all their sins and sorrows under elder-trees, thinking that they thereby gave to the lower world what properly belonged to it. This corresponds accurately to the gypsy incantation which passes the disease on from the elder bark into the earth, and from earth unto death. Frau Ellhorn, or Ellen, was the old German name for this plant. "Frau, perhaps, as appropriate to the female elf who dwelt in it" (FRIEDRICH, "Symbolik," p. 293). When it was necessary to cut one down, the peasant always knelt first before it and prayed: "Lady Ellhorn, give me of thy wood, and I will give thee of mine when it shall grow in the forest." GRIMM cites from a MS. Of 1727 the following: "Paga nismo ortum debet superstitio, sambucam non esse exscindendum nisi prius rogata permissione his verbis: Mater Sambuci permitte mihi tuæ cædere sylvam!" On the other hand, Elder had certain protective and healing virtues. Hung before a stable door it warded off witchcraft, and he who planted it conciliated evil spirits. And if a twig of it were planted on a grave and it grew, that was a sign that the soul of the deceased was happy, which is the probable reason why the very old Jewish cemetery in Prague was planted full of elders. In a very curious and rare work, entitled "Blockesberge Berichtung (Leipzig, 1669), by JOHN PRÆTORIUS, devoted to "the Witch-ride and Sorcery-Sabbath," the author tells us that witches make great use of nine special herbs—"nam in herbis, verbis et lapidibus magna vis est." Among these is Elder, of which the peasants make wreaths, which, if they wear on Walpurgis night, they can see the sorceresses as they sweep through the air on their brooms, dragons, goats, and other strange steeds to the Infernal Dance. Or when they anderswo herumvagiren—"go vagabonding anywhere else." "Yea, and I know one fellow who sware unto men, that by means of this herb he once saw certain witches churning butter busily, and that on a roof, but I mistrust that this was a sell (Schnake), and that the true name of this knave was Butyrolambius" ("Blocksberg," p. 475). The same author informs us that Hollunder (or Elder) is so called from hohl, or hollow, or else is an anagram of Unholden, unholy spirits, and some people call it Alhuren, from its connection with witches and debauchery, even as CORDUS writes:—

"When elder blossoms bloom upon the bush,
Then women's hearts to sensual pleasure rush."

He closes his comments on this subject with the dry remark that if the people of Leipzig wear, as is their wont, garlands of elder with the object of preventing breaches of the seventh commandment among them, it has in this instance, at least, utterly failed to produce the expected effect. "Quasi! creadt Judæus Apella!"
It should be mentioned that in the gypsy spell the next morning the cloth with the elder-bark must be thrown into the next running water. To cure toothache the Transylvanian gypsies wind a barley-straw round a stone, which is thrown into a running stream, while saying:—

"Oh dukh ándre m're dándá,
Tu ná báres cingerá!
Ná ává kiyá mánge,
Mire muy ná hin kere!
Tut ñikáná me kámáv,
Ač tu mánge pál páčá;
Káná e pçus yárpakri
Avel tele páñori!"

"Oh, pain in my teeth,
Trouble me not so greatly!
Do not come to me,
My mouth is not thy house.
I love thee not all,
Stay thou away from me;
When this straw is in the brook
Go away into the water!"

Straw was anciently a symbol of emptiness, unfruitfulness, and death, and it is evidently used in this sense by the gypsies, or derived by them from some tradition connected with it. A feigned or fruitless marriage is indicated in Germany by the terms Strohwittwer and Strohwittwe. From the earliest times in France the breaking a straw signified that a compact was broken with a man because there was nothing in him. Thus in 922 the barons of Charles the Simple, in dethroning him, broke the straws which they held (CHARLOTTE DE LA TOUR, "Symbols of Flowers").

Still, straws have something in them. She who will lay straws on the table in the full moonlight by an open window, especially on Saturday night, and will repeat:—

"Straw, draw, crow craw,
By my life I give thee law"

then the straws will become fairies and dance to the cawing of a crow who will come and sit on the ]edge of the window. And so witches were wont to make a man of straw, as did Mother Gookin, in Hawthorne's tale, and unto these they gave life, whence the saying of a man of straw and straw bail, albeit this latter is deemed by some to be related to the breaking of straws and of dependence, as told in the tale of Charles the Simple. Straw-lore is extensive and curious. As in elder-stalks, small fairies make their homes in its tubes. To strew chopped straw before the house of a bride was such an insult to her character, in Germany, and so common that laws were passed against it. I possess a work printed about 1650, entitled "De Injuriis quæ haud raro Novis Nuptis inferri solent. I. Per sparsionem dissectorum culmorum frugum. Germ. Dusch das Werckerling Streuen," &c. An immense amount of learned quotation and reference by its author indicates that this custom which was influenced by superstition, was very extensively written on in its time. It was allied to the binding of knots and other magic ceremonies to prevent the consummation of marriages.

There is a very curious principle involved in curing certain disorders or afflictions by means of spells or verses. A certain word is repeated many times in a mysterious manner, so that it strikes the imagination of the sufferer. There is found in the Slavonian countries a woolly caterpillar called Wolos, whose bite, or rather touch, is much dreaded. I have myself, when a boy, been stung by such a creature in the United States. As I remember, it was like the sting of a bee. The following (Malo Russian) spell against it was given me by Prof. DRAGOMANOFF in Geneva. It is supposed that a certain kind of disorder, or cutaneous eruption, is caused by the Wolos:—

"Wolosni—Wolosnicéh!
Holy Wolos.
Once a man drove over empty roads
With empty oxen,
To an empty field,
To harvest empty corn,
And gather it in empty ricks. p. 33
He gathered the empty sheaves,
Laid them in empty Wagons,
Drove over empty roads,
Unto an empty threshing-floor.
The empty labourers threshed it,
And bore it to the empty Mill.
The empty baker (woman)
Mixed it in an empty trough,
And baked it in an empty oven.
The empty people ate the empty bread.
So may the Wolos swallow this disorder
From the empty ——- (here the name of the patient.)

What is here understood by "empty" is that the swelling is taken away, subtracted, or emptied, by virtue of the repetition of the word, as if one should say, "Be thou void. Depart! depart! depart! Avoid me!"

There is a very curious incantation also apparently of Indian-gypsy origin, since it refers to the spirits of the water who cause diseases. In this instance they are supposed to be exorcised by Saint Paphnutius, who is a later Slavonian-Christian addition to the old Shamanic spell. In the Accadian-Chaldæan formulas these spirits are seven; here they are seventy.

The formula in question is against the fever:—

"In the name of God and his Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen!

"Seventy fair maids went up out of the ocean.

"They met the Saint Paphnutius, who asked:

"'Whence come ye, oh Maidens?'

"They answered, 'From the ocean-sea.

"'We go into the world to break the bones of men.

"'To give them the fever. (To make hot and cold).'"

Then the holy Paphnutius began to beat them, and gave them every one seventy-seven days:—

"They began to pray, 'O holy Paphnutius!

"'Forgive us, (and) whoever shall bear with him (thy) name, or write it, him we will leave in peace.

"'We will depart from him

"'Over the streams, over the seas.

"'Over the reeds (canes) and marshes.

"'O holy Paphnutius, sua misericordia, of thy mercy,

"'Have pity on thy slave, even on the sick man ——— (the name is here uttered).

"'Free him from fever!'"

It is remarkable that, as a certain mysterious worm, caterpillar, or small lizard (accounts differ) among the Algonkin Indians is supposed to become at will a dragon, or sorcerer, or spirit, to be invoked or called on so the Wolos worm is also invoked, sometimes as a saint or sorcerer, and sometimes as a spirit who scatters disease. The following gypsy-Slavonian incantation over an invalid has much in common with the old Chaldæan spells

"Wolosni, Wolosnicéh!
Thou holy Wolos!
God calls thee unto his dwelling,
Unto his seat.
Thou shalt not remain here,
To break the yellow bones.
To drink the red blood,
To dry up the white body.
Go forth as the bright sun
Goes forth over the mountains,
Out from the seventy-seven veins,
Out from the seventy limbs (parts of the body).
Before I shall recognize thee,
Before I did not name thee (call on thee).
But now I know who thou art;
I began to pray to the mother of God,
And the mother of God began to aid me.
Go as the wind goes over the meadows or the shore (or banks),
As the waves roll over the waters,
So may the Wolos go from ———
The man who is born,
Who is consecrated with prayer."

The Shamanic worship of water as a spirit is extremely ancient, and is distinctly recognized as such by the formulas of the Church in which water is called "this creature." The water spirits play a leading part in the gypsy mythology. The following gypsy-Slav charm, to consecrate a swarm of bees, was also given to me by Prof. DRAGOMANOFF, who had learned it from a peasant:—

"One goes to the water and makes his prayer and greets the water thus:—

"Hail to thee, Water!
Thou Water, Oliana!
Created by God,
And thou, oh Earth, Titiana!
And ye the near springs, brooks and rivulets,
Thou Water, Oliana,
Thou goest over the earth,
Over the neighbouring fountains and streams,
Down unto the sea,
Thou dost purify the sea,
The sand, the rocks, and the roots—
I pray thee grant me
Of the water of this lake,
To aid me,
To sprinkle my bees.
I will speak a word,
And God will give me help,
The all-holy Mother of God,
The mother of Christ,
Will aid me,
And the holy Father
The holy Zosimos, Sabbateus and the holy Friday Parascabeah!

"When this is said take the water and bear it home without looking back. Then the bees are to be sprinkled therewith."

The following Malo-Russian formula from the same authority, though repointed and gilt with Greek Christianity, is old heathen, and especially interesting since Prof. DRAGOMANOFF traces it to a Finnic Shaman source:—

"CHARM AGAINST THE BITE OF A SERPENT.

"The holy Virgin sent a man
Unto Mount Sion,
Upon this mountain
Is the city of Babylon,
And in the city of Babylon
Lives Queen Volga.p. 36
Oh Queen Volga,
Why dost thou not teach
This servant of God
(Here the name of the one bitten by a serpent is mentioned)
So that he may not be bitten
By serpents?"

    (The reply of Queen Volga)
"Not only will I teach my descendants
But I also will prostrate myself
Before the Lord God."

"Volga is the name of a legendary heathen princess of Kief, who was baptized and sainted by the Russian Church. The feminine form, Olga, or Volga, corresponds to the masculine name Oleg, or Olg, the earliest legendary character of Kief. His surname was Viechtchig—the sage or sorcerer" (i.e., wizard, and from a cognate root). "In popular songs he is called Volga, or Volkh, which is related to Volkv, a sorcerer. The Russian annals speak of the Volkv of Finland, who are represented as Shamans." Niya Predania i Raikazi ("Traditions and Popular Tales of Lesser Russia," by M. DRAGOMANOFF, Kief, 1876) in Russian.

I have in the chapter on curing the disorders of children spoken of Lilith, or Herodias, who steals the new-born infants. She and her twelve daughters are also types of the different kinds of fever for which the gypsies have so many cures of the same character, precisely as those which were used by the old Bogomiles. The characteristic point is that this female spirit is everywhere regarded as the cause of catalepsy or fits. Hence the invocation to St. Sisinie is used in driving them away. This invocation written, is carried as an amulet or fetish. I give the translation of one of these from the Roumanian, in which the Holy Virgin is taken as the healer. It is against cramp in the night:—

"SPELL AGAINST NIGHT-CRAMP.

"There is a mighty hill, and on this hill is a golden apple-tree,

"Under the golden apple-tree is a golden stool.

"On the stool—who sits there?

"There sits the Mother of God with Saint Maria; with the boxes in her right hand, with the cup in her left.

"She looks up and sees naught, she looks down and sees my Lord and Lady Disease.

"Lords and Ladies Cramp, Lord and Lady Vampire—Lord Wehrwolf and his wives.

"They are going to ——— (the sufferer), to drink his blood and put in him a foul heart.

"The Mother of God, when she saw them, went down to them, spoke to them, and asked them, 'Whither go ye, Lord and Lady Disease,—Lords and Ladies Cramp, &c.?'

"'We go to ——— to drink his blood, to change his heart to a foul one.'

"'No, ye shall return; give him his blood back, restore him his own heart, and leave him immediately.'

"Cramps of the night, cramps of the midnight, cramps of the day, cramps wherever they are. From water, from the wind, go out from the brain, from the light of he face, from the hearing of the ears, from his heart, from his hands and feet, from the soles of his feet.

"Go and hide where black cocks never crow, 1 where men never go, where no beast roars.

"Hide yourself there, stop there, and never show yourself more!

"May ——— remain pure and glad, as he was made by God, and was fated by the Mother of God!

"The spell is mine—the cure is God's."

In reference to the name Herodias (here identified with Lilith, the Hebrew mother of all devils and goblins); it was a great puzzle to the writers on witchcraft why the Italian witches always said they had two queens whom they worshipped—Diana and Herodias. The latter seems to have specially presided at the witch-dance. In this we can see an evident connection with the Herodias of the New Testament.

I add to this a few more very curious old Slavonian spells from Dr. Gaster's work, as they admirably illustrate one of the principal and most interesting subjects connected with the gypsy witchcraft; that is to say, its relation to early Shamanism and the forms in which its incantations were expressed. In all of these it may be taken for granted, from a great number of closely-allied examples, that the Christianity in them is recent and that they all go back to the earliest heathen times. The following formula, dating from 1423, against snake-bites bears the title:—

"PRAYER OF ST. PAUL AGAINST SNAKES.

"In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I once was a persecutor, but am now a true follower; and I went from my dwelling-place in Sicily, and they set light to a trunk, and a snake came therefrom and bit my right hand and hung from it. But I had in me the power of God, and I shook it off into the burning fire and it was destroyed, and I suffered no ill from the bite. I laid myself down to sleep; then the mighty angel said: 'Saul, Paul, stand up and receive this writing'; and I found in it the following words:

"'I exorcise you, sixty and a half kinds of beasts that creep on the earth, in the name of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and in the name of the immovable throne.

"'Serpent of Evil, I exorcise thee in the name of the burning river which rises under the footstool of the Saviour, and in the name of His incorporeal angels!

"'Thou snake of the tribe of basilisks, thou foul-headed snake, twelve-headed snake, variegated snake, dragon-like snake, that art on the right side of hell, whomsoever thou bitest thou shalt have no power to harm, and thou must go away with all the twenty-four kinds. If a man has this prayer and this curse of the true, holy apostle, and a snake bites him, then it will die on the spot, and the man that is bitten shall remain unharmed, to the honour of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and for all time. Amen.'"

It is not improbable that we have in PAUL and the Serpent and the formula for curing its bite (which is a common symbol for all disease) a souvenir of Esculapius, the all-healer, and his serpent. The following is "a prayer against the toothache, to be carried about with one," i.e., as an amulet prayer:—

"SPELL FOR THE TOOTHACHE

"Saint Peter sat on a stone and wept. Christ came to him and said, 'Peter, why weepest thou?' Peter answered, 'Lord, my teeth pain me.' The Lord thereupon ordered the worm in Peter's tooth to come out of it and never more go in again. Scarcely had the worm come out when the pain ceased. Then spoke Peter, 'I pray you, O Lord, that when these words be written out and a man carries them he shall have no toothache.' And the Lord answered, '"Tis well, Peter; so may it be!'"

It will hardly be urged that this Slavonian charm of Eastern origin could have been originated independently in England. The following, which is there found in the north, is, as Gaster remarks, "in the same: wording":—

"Peter was sitting on a marble stone,
And Jesus passed by.
Peter said, 'My Lord, my God,
How my tooth doth ache!'
Jesus said, Peter art whole
And whosoever keeps these words for My sake
Shall never have the toothache.'

The next specimen is a—

"CHARM AGAINST NOSE-BLEEDING.

"Zachariah was slain in the Lord's temple, and his blood turned into stone. Then stop, O blood, for the Lord's servant, ———. I exorcise thee, blood, that thou stoppest in the name of the Saviour, and by fear of the priests when they perform the liturgy at the altar."

Those who sell these charms are almost universally supposed to be mere quacks and humbugs. If this were the case, why do they so very carefully learn and preserve these incantations, transmitting them

        "as a rich legacy
Unto their issue."

But they really do believe in them, and will give great prices for them. Prof. DRAGOMANOFF told me that once in Malo-Russia it became generally known that he had made a MS. collection of such spells. A peasant who was desirous of becoming a sorcerer, but who had very few incantations of his own, went whenever he could by stealth into the Professor's library and surreptitiously copied his incantations. And when Prof. DRAGOMANOFF returned the next year to that neighbourhood, he found the peasant doing a very good business as a conjuring doctor, or faith-healer. I have a lady correspondent in the United States who has been initiated into Voodoo and studied Indian-negro witchcraft under two eminent teachers, one a woman, the other a man. The latter, who was at the very head of the profession, sought the lady's acquaintance because he had heard that she possessed some very valuable spells. In the fourth or highest degree, as in Slavonian or Hungarian gypsy-magic, this Indian-Voodoo deals exclusively with the spirits of the forest and stream.

M. Kounavine, as set forth by Dr. A. Elysseeff (Gypsy-Lore Journal, July, 1890), gives a Russian gypsy incantation by which the fire is invoked to cure illness. It is as follows:—

"Great Fire, my defender and protector, son of the celestial fire, equal of the sun who cleanses the earth of foulness, deliver this man from the evil sickness that torments him night and day!"

The fire is also invoked to punish, or as an ordeal, e.g.:—

"Fire, who punishest the evil-doer, who hatest falsehood, who scorchest the impure, thou destroyest offenders; thy flame devoureth the earth. Devour ——— if he says what is not true, if he thinks a lie, and if he acts deceitfully."

These are pronounced by the gypsy sorcerer facing the burning hearth. There is another in which fire is addressed as Jandra, and also invoked to punish an offender:—

"Jandra, bearer of thunderbolts, great Periani (compare Parjana, an epithet of Indra, Slavonic Perun), bearer of lightning, slay with thy thunderbolt and burn with thy celestial fire him who dares to violate his oath."
Philochrysus: This was upon me to ask you. You may remember then that you told me how the description of your city which we then read, was more literal, than is easy to be believed, and withal more mystical than it is possible for the wisest of mortals to comprehend. And in particular you told me that it was built first of true and substantial Gold; secondly of fine Gold; thirdly of transparent or glassy Gold; and fourthly of living Gold.
I desire now that you would answer me to all these particulars in order. Do you then say that this city is built of true Gold, and that it is not only metaphorically said to be built of Gold? Is it as real and substantial, is it as visible and palpable, and has it as many good qualities as this which I have now in my hand?
Philadelphus: Yes, Philochrysus, I can assure you that it is built of true and not metaphorical Gold, as some would have it only to be. This Gold, I say, is no less real and substantial, and no less visible and palpable to its inhabitants and has as many, yea more, good qualities that that which you hold in your hand, and seem so pleased with. I know that this is a strange language, and I shall have much ado to make myself understood by you but in any degree. Because I must speak of that which you have never seen, or handled; though others have both seen and handled of it, and you also may come in time to do the same. So that it will be almost as hard a matter for one that is born blind to understand the philosophy of colours, or one born deaf the nature and distinction of sounds, as for you to comprehend what I am about to say of a certain substance that is visible to some but not to you, palpable to some but not to you; and which therefore you have no kind of apprehension of.

Philochrysus: I promise to be very attentive. Do me the favour but to satisfy me as far as you can.

Philadelphus: Well, I will endeavour your satisfaction, after that you shall have answered me a question or two that I have to propose to you.

Philochrysus: I am very ready to do it.

Philadelphus: Why do ye believe that piece of Gold which ye showed me, to be true, real and substantial, and not shadowy, figurative and accidental?

Philochrysus: Why do I believe so? I am not such a stranger to the truth, as not to be able to distinguish it from a shadow. A shadow will fly from me if I go to catch at it, but this I can grasp fast enough. A shadow depends on the substance, and on the position of the Sun which casts it. It has no figure but from the substance, and that is always very faint and weak; it cannot be touched, it has no ponderosity, no light, no power in it. But this is ponderous, bright and powerful. You see me touch it, and its figure is not faint or weak but vivid and strong, without depending upon anything else. Wherever I move it, and whatever the position of it may be to the Sun or light, it still retains the same shape and the same substance. And now I have it fast, I dare venture its flying away.

Philadelphus: I see you are well satisfied with yourself. But pray tell me, how would you give a description of it, to satisfy another that had never seen it, or perhaps never heard of it; or if ever heard of it, yet not otherwise than as a figurative sound to please children with, or as a rattle, a picture, a shadow, a name without substance, without reality? How would you make it to be understood to a Philosopher, and how to a merchant that is no philosopher, supposing them both to be strangers to the nature and use of this sovereign metal?

Philochrysus: Truly, Philadelphus, you begin to puzzle me. And besides I cannot see whither all your windings and turnings will at last lead me. Indeed, it would be a difficult matter to resolve satisfactorily either a Philosopher or a merchant concerning this dear precious metal, if they have not some manner of notice of it beforehand. But since it is not unlawful to make such a supposition, I am ready also to make such an answer as I can. 
I would therefore endeavour to satisfy them, by making use of such ideas, images and conceptions which they are already acquainted with; and by compounding them and dividing them, I would strive to frame in the inquirer an idea, image and conception hereof, which might approach as near as possible to the truth. As for instance, if I were to discourse with a philosopher, whom I will suppose to live in the remotest part of Tartary, or in some dark corner near to the Northern Pole where mines of Gold were never so much as heard of, and no name even found for it in the language of the country. I would think in the first place what to call it, that he might in some sort apprehend me, while I am discoursing with him. Now because some Copper mines may be near to him, and he may have both seen and handled and also tried several experiments upon this metal, therefore I will call it fine Copper or perhaps fine Brass, if this be likewise known to him. Then because I must speak to him in his own terms, and he has used himself to those of Mercury and Sulphur, I will tell him this fine Copper is compounded of a pure Mercurial Water and a pure Sulphureous earth, exactly proportioned and duly maturated and concocted by the Sun-beams in some proper matrix or vessel. 
Next I will, as far as I am able, show him the difference, both in quantity and quality, of the compounding principles of this fine Copper, and of his Copper. Whereupon I tell him that the Mercurial Water, which enters into the composition of this fine Copper, is not only more subtle, defecated and pure, than that which is in that Gothic Copper of his, but also that it is there in a much greater quantity. Likewise I tell him that the quantity of the Brimstone or Sulphureous Earth, which enters into the composition of the Gothic copper is greater than that which is in this fine (which I call for distinction the Peruvian) Copper, but that in the former it is more coarse than in the latter. Herein lies the main difference of the Peruvian and the Gothic Copper (which I must make my philosopher understand) as to the composition of the principles both in the one and the other. Which are both essentially the same, but diversified as well according to quality as quantity. He must then confess to me, that the Mercury in the Gothic Copper must needs be originally infected and poisoned, and that there must be a defect in its proportion: as likewise that the coarseness, the superfluity and the combustibleness of its Sulphur are no inconsiderable impediments to the perfection of this metal. And he will grant me to this, I believe, though he never have seen the fine metal of Peru, that there may be such a Copper there found as I do describe, if there may be but a Mercury, or water of Life, freed from its original infection and poison, and then fitly adapted and conjoined with a proper Sulphur that shall be pure and of an incombustible nature, so as not to diminish in the severest fires. 
However perhaps he will maintain, that I ought not altogether to despise the Sulphureous Earth of his Gothick Copper; for that though it were not so pure, fixed and permanent as that of the other, yet it was of the very same essence and nature with it, and therefore also might possibly come to be in like manner purified and made incombustible.
And when I have brought him thus far, then I may speak unto him of the several properties of our fine copper, and leave him to compare them with those of that coarse sort which is only known to him. And here if I could give him an exact calculation of the weight of a cubical inch of the Peruvian Copper, comparing it with a cubical inch of the Gothick and showing the preponderancy of that above this, I should settle in him a just idea as to one property of it. Another property is purity and clarity, which I must in the next place give him to understand by deduction from such ideas or conceptions which he has already admitted. A third is its tincture, and here as I must heighten that idea which he has entertained on one side, so I must lessen it on the other, that this man may exactly quadrate with the original. A fourth and main property which I am to tell him of is Fixation, or the immortality and indefectibility of the tincture, life or soul of this metallic body. Besides all which I may in the fifth place discourse to him of the extreme ductability or rarefaction of it; if it might not be too prodigious for his belief; and sixthly, of its medicinal uses and qualities, which would afford me a great variety of matters to entertain him with.
And thus I shall have in some degree satisfied my Tartarian or my Gothick Philosopher, that the fine Copper of Peru is not metaphorical or symbolical, as his poor country men, who have never seen it, would persuade him: but that it is as truly, really and substantially of a metallic nature and consistence, as that which he daily handles for such. And he now begins to understand how this fine copper, which I otherwise call Gold, is compounded of the same (yet better graduated) principles, with a more exact proportion than his, and that it is not metaphorically, but really a metallic substance, more ponderous, and brighter than the other, also of a bitter (though not so deep) Tincture, more fixed and ductile, and lastly more proper for human bodies, to be used internally or externally, when prepared according to Art. 
So I take my leave of my Philosopher, and go next to my merchant. Here I shall not have so much to do, as with the former. I need only to mind him in brief of the several properties about which I discoursed my philosopher, and then declare unto him the great and excellent use thereof in commerce, so as more than four hundred times to answer the other in common valuation, and often more than five hundred.

Philadelphus: Tis enough, I find you like well the subject that you are upon, but hope it will serve to lead you into one that is far better. Of all that you have now said, nothing will be found to be in vain, when I shall come to examine you. The tables may come perhaps to be turned upon yourself. Wherefore let me persuade you to try thoroughly, whether that be indeed gold, which you believe to be so. But since you have been pleased to satisfy me as to what I demanded, I am now most ready to satisfy you, as to what was propounded; only I must first premise two or three things that I may be understood by you. Wherefore be now attentive and consider well what I am about to say.

Philochrysus: I will be sure Sir, to attend your motion, for I begin to be very jealous, that you have been carrying on all this while some plot to undermine me. But pray let us hear your premises, and I promise to make the best use of all the ears and eyes which I have.

Philadelphus: The first thing that I wish then to premise is this, That the Divine Blessing was originally spoken forth upon the whole Creation of God. Or as some would rather choose to express it - It was outspoken into the Creation, that is, by a real, vital and essential infusion engrafted into it. So that whatever come out of the hands of God was good. No evil should ever be derived from the Divine Being, who notwithstanding the supreme liberty of Will, is necessitated when He acts, to act according to Goodness. No sin nor death, no barrenness or drought, no weakness or disproportion could at all proceed from him. Wherefore he rejoicing, as it were, in the works of his hands, pronounced them both severally and universally to be good, yea very good, as considered in their whole system, and harmonious union with each other.

Philochrysus: I must grant that you say. But I would fain see to what purpose It will serve you.

Philadelphus: You may yet, before we part.

Philochrysus: I cannot deny but that God blessed the whole Creation and that all the works of his hands are good. Make your best of it.

Philadelphus: The second thing that I have to premise is but as a corollary from the former, and is strengthened by universal experience. It is this, The Works of the Creation are not Now in the same State, as they were when they first came out of the hands of God, or as when the Divine Blessing was pronounced upon them, or outspoken onto them, yet with this limitation, so far as they are within our Sphere or Orb. For experience doth at this day too sufficiently attest that the creatures, whether they be of the animal, vegetable or mineral kingdom, cannot be all said to be good, howsoever they be considered, either separately by themselves, or conjunctly in harmony with the rest. And whatever may be pleaded on their behalf by some acute philosophers and divines, that all the creatures are, even at this day, good; though not positively, yet relatively, and with respect both to their present constitution and the constitution of the world in general, it is evident, to me at least, if either the undoubted records of scripture, or the natural light of reason may judge of the appeal, that all that they can say will, if it prove any thing, certainly conduce to the very overturning of the positive goodness of the Divine Being,and the introducing in the room thereof a certain relative, hypothetical and imaginary goodness, and to the building up a very odd and irregular system of the Universe.
This if it were necessary, I might at large deduce through several particulars, proving the absurdity and inconsistency of such a supposition, that has been taken up of late by some men of name, and by them too mush authorised to the dishonour of God, though they might not perhaps design it so, as I am apt both to hope and believe. But this would lead me out very far and keep me too long from the resolution of the question in hand. However, Philochrysus, if at any other time you think it worth your while to demand a particular satisfaction as to this point, I shall be most willing to give it to you.

Philochrysus: I thank you, Philadelphus. At present I am well enough satisfied in this matter; yea so much as I have often with my self admired, even when bit by a flea, how any could be serious in pleading for the perfection of the present constitution of the World of Nature, as if it never had been better, or was never to be better; but after it shall have lasted out such a term, that it must return back again into its primitive state of nothingness; by the most dreadful dissolution through Fire. This their catastrophe of Our World, I must confess, did never very well please me; but did always stick.

Philadelphus: Its is then granted by you that the present constitution of this terrestrial world in which we live, is not so perfect and good as it was originally brought forth by God, and that it may, by the gift of god, recover again its original constitution.

Philochrysus: It is granted.

Philadelphus: Well! Answer me now this one question. Which do you now think best deserves to be called by this or that name, that which is most perfect in its kind, and that which comes up most really to the true and original frame of its nature, or that which falls short of it, and is very Imperfect as to its kind? 
As for instance, you take two sheep, or two horses, and of these let one be placed at the right hand and the other at the left. Suppose now the horse at the right hand to have all the most excellent features and proportions of an horse, and that at the left to have none of them at all, but to be very mean and despicable. Suppose also the sheep at the right hand, to be very plump and fat, and to wear a Golden Fleece upon its back, and that at the left to be lean, deformed and leprous. Will you hereupon say that the horse at the left hand is a real horse, but that at the right a metaphorical one? Or that the sheep at the left is a true sheep, but not that at the right? And will you not rather say that these by approaching nearer to the perfection of their nature, and to the original integrity and beauty in which they were first both brought forth from the Divine exemplar, do less deserve to be called figurative or allegorical than the other.

Philochrysus: So indeed it seems to me, if either of these may be called a figurative sheep, or a figurative horse, it must be the left-handed ones, who come not up to the primitive constitution of their nature, into which the divine blessing was spoken, but have fallen under the curse, and suffered the depravation of their first pure form, according to the supposition that is granted you. And if any one had ever seen such an other but such lean and deformed sheep, or such ill conditioned and disproportioned jakes, verily I say should much condemn his rashness, if he should say there were no other, but positively conclude these to be the best of the kind, and that above them are but hypothetical metaphors, or poetical expressions of somewhat transcending nature. Yea I should be a little angry if he should be so obstinate as to stand out against the authentic relations of ocular witness, or go to oblige me to deny my own senses, because his have not had the same experience which mine also had.

Philadelphus: Suppose also that you have two bushels of wheat, the one whereof is half full of chaff, the other perfectly cleansed, the one blighted, the other large grained and sound. Would you say that the blighted and chaffy corn is only real and substantial, but the sound and the cleansed to be no more than a metaphor or a shadow. I believe not.
Suppose once more that you have two pips of Spanish wine, the one natural and unsophisticated, clean and sprightly, the other pipe sophisticated and filled up half with water: and that you have tasted only of the latter. Would you say that this only is true wine, and not the other?

Philochrysus: No, Philadelphus, I think I should not so far expose my own judgment. And though I should not have tasted of the finest wine, yet would I not say there is no better than that I have tasted; and assert that what I am told of the other is only fancy or figure.

Philadelphus: Now my dear Philochrysus, Hold to your words. For I see two pieces of gold, the one as at your right hand, the other is at your left, the one celestial gold, the other terrestrial gold, like as there are bodies celestial and bodied terrestrial. The gold of your left hand you see and handle, and say therefore that it is substantial. The gold of the right hand you see not neither can you handle, and conclude therefore that it is shadowy. The reason whereof is this. The former has a peculiar virtue in it to blind that eye by which the former Gold may be discerned, and to induce such a paralytic numbness and deadness on all one part of the man that has a lust after it, that he cannot possibly feel or handle the other till his disease be first removed from him. But as for me, that Gold which you call substantial, I should of the two rather choose to call shadowy Gold, and that which you think to be shadowy and figurative, I must call substantial and real, on far greater reasons than you have produced to move me to the contrary.

Philochrysus: I cannot but believe my senses. You shall not easily persuade me out of them. For if they deceive me, I can be certain of nothing.

Philadelphus: Be not afraid: you may keep your senses still for me. Since the senses deceive none; but it is the judgment which is made upon them that may be erroneous. Take care therefore that you judge not amiss, and think that to be in the object itself which is nothing but an impression produced by it upon the sensory. But tell me, do you ever dream?

Philochrysus: Yes I do.

Philadelphus: You may then remember how you thought that you have seen, felt and handled various objects which have vanished away as soon as you awakened.

Philochrysus: I do. And particularly I call to mind, how I have sometime thought myself to be rolling among bags of gold. So that it has been no small trouble to me to find myself undeceived in the morning.

Philadelphus: Forget not this. The application will not be difficult, and very nearly concerns you, my friend. Philochrysus, you are in a dream at this very instant, and you will certainly find yourself undeceived in the morning, when your senses that are now locked up in sleep shall recover themselves.

Philochrysus: In a dream say you? Nay, then the whole world is a dream. All that I do is dream and fancy, and whatever I behold or handle is but a shadow. Will you make all the world beside yourself to be in a dream? Will you make all the hurly-burlies in it, all the traffickings, negotiations, and wars, with all manner of transactions, private and public, civil and religious, to be nothing more but the sportive imaginations of the night? Will you make nothing to be real or substantial of what is seen, felt , heard or understood by us poor mortals? Sure,Phildelphus, you are no sceptic.

Philadelphus: No, I am an eclectic. But yet I have found the good of scepticism, as to many things that you believe. And if it go not too far, it is the foundation of all solid knowledge, natural, political or divine. Wherefore, however strange it may appear to you, it is not very far from the truth, to say that this world, with all that is in it, is but a dream or a shadow when compared with the invisible worlds. I am afraid to press you too much with these matters, and therefore I only said it is not very far from the truth to say so, but the indubitable records wherein in manifestly the finger of God, would bear me out, if I should say that it is the very truth itself. Search into these and you will find enough to open your eyes and let you see that the form of this World passeth away, and that all that belongs to it is no more than as a vision of the might, which flies away with the day break. My thoughts have been formerly the same with yours: the poisoned cup from the hand of the Fair Harlot, whom I have mentioned to you, cast me into a deep sleep. And in it I remember, I had just the same dreams which you have now. I thought terrestrial gold was as substantial as you imagine it to be, and of the celestial gold I had no manner of apprehension; but was contented to look on it as a figure and not as a substance. But I was roused out of my sleep by a swift messenger out of the Heavenly Philadelphia, upon which all the enchanted scenes of the night immediately fled away, and I awakened recovering the senses which had been before chained up, and then I quickly perceived my errors. Ah! Philochrysus! Awake! Awake! There stands now at your right hand one of the citizens of that beautiful city, who holds before him a medal made of the same gold, which he would present to you, if you would but suffer your eyes to be opened, and would not hold so fast the shadow.

Philochrysus: What mean you to do with me? Oh! A little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more of this worlds, and then I awake. Disturb me not.

Philadelphus: He talks in his sleep. Ho! Ho! Philochrysus. You will not yet be awakened I find. I will therefore for a little time grant you your hearts desire, and this once, suppose that you are not asleep while you sleep, but that your dream is a reality, and all the conclusions that you have made from the exercise of your outward senses to be true. For by parity of reason (even granting what you say) as you do conclude the terrestrial gold to be true, real and substantial, I do conclude the celestial to be so, and much more so. If you plead sensation for yours, I know those that plead it for ours, and that deserve as much (at least) to be believed as any that you bring. But lest you might not so readily believe or apprehend perhaps the witnesses that I could produce, I will proceed with you as you would do with your Goth or Tartar, that had never heard of the gold mines of Peru. Wherefore I must needs tell you that if the Peruvian gold be true gold, then the Philadelphian gold deserves also of right so to be called, yea is much better qualified of the two to bear this name, as it is more perfect in its kind, and as it more nearly approaches then the former to the true and original frame of pure and undefiled nature, exactly compounded according to the divine exemplar, and duly concocted in the bowels of the everlasting mountains, the mountains of the Sun and the Mountains of the Moon. Whence, supposing the difference of Philadelphian and Peruvian Gold to be, as the difference of Peruvian and Gothic Copper; this will not hinder but that the Philadelphian Gold, both according to the greater purity of its constituent principles (as without the least alloy of the curse) and the most exact proportion of then, may well deserve to be looked on no less real than the Peruvian.

Philochrysus: If it be so, pray dear Philadelphus, give me some of it, that I may make a proof.

Philadelphus: You are not yet out of your dream, you know not what you say. For you neither understand what manner of Gold this is, neither who it is that can give it. It may be called to you by a thousand names, but I do assure you that it is true and proved gold. And let me tell you that your gold, or the false brass of Peru, is not constituted of Principles altogether pure and defected, but mixed with some close and inherent imperfections. Neither are the proportions adjusted according to perfect Nature, but only according to the perfect constitution of this terrestrial orb. The curse that has entered into the whole lower Creation has also entered into this, and it is not a perfect metal, except with respect to the lapsed and broken frame of this our Earth.

Philochrysus: Hah! Philadelphus! I am wondering where you will run at last. I am not so much in a dream, but I can laugh at these amusements of yours. Did ever any before deny Gold to be a perfect metal?

Philadelphus: Mistake me not. I do not deny it to be a perfect metal with respect to the present order of things in their Fallen State. But I do positively aver that it is not a perfect metal with respect to that primitive and original order of Beings which proceeded immediately from God through His Word, wherein and whereby they subsist; but that it partakes of the curse, as well as all the other subjects of the mineral or metallic kingdom, though not in the same degree. Now there is an Inherent curse, and there is also an Adherent Curse, and of both of these it more or less participates.

Philochrysus: Pray what do you mean by an Inherent Curse, and how do you appropriate it to the Terrestrial Gold.

Philadelphus: Know what is the Blessing and you cannot fail to know what is the Curse in Nature. There is an Inherent Blessing in every creature, and there is also an Adherent Blessing. Without the former God could never have pronounced them good, and without the latter they could never have been serviceable to man, or to the rest of their fellow creatures. A privation, or loss, in either of these kinds, is called the Curse. And as it has diverse degrees and is variously specified, so takes it up diverse names, as Death, Darkness, Hades, Sheol, the Turba, the Left Hand, the Seed of the Serpent, the Mist out of the Earth, Lilith, Arimanius, Poison, the Blood of the Old Dragon, the Prisons, the North, and many others. 
The benediction now of both kinds may be lessened, hidden or removed either in part of in whole. The Adherent Benediction may possibly admit of a total remove and separation, but the inherent can never do this without the destruction and annihilation of the subject wherein it is. Whence though it may be hid, yet can it never be separated without the entire disunion of its constituent and vital principles. Which are not perishable, but endure the same, notwithstanding all the cortices, veils, and coverings, wherewith they may be overcast or oppressed, and which are said to be under the president-ship of so many evil Angels. 
Behold then here is Wisdom to take away the Inherent Curse from the creature, and to cause the disappeared Blessing to reappear, and exert forth itself. Now shall you understand how this curse is to be appropriated to the terrestrial Gold, and how the contrary Blessing is to be predicated of the celestial. But in the first place you are to take notice, that as the inherent is here less than in any other subjects of the same Kingdom and Order, so the Adherent Curse is greater. In the second place you are to observe that the primary and Radical principles being (as to us) invisible in themselves, the secondary and elementary, which may be made visible, can be here only examined into. 
In the third place, I am now to acquaint you that these elementary principles, which I call also Spermatical, as I call the former Seminal, are vastly different in the state of pure and of corrupt Nature. 
For in pure nature there is found a bright living crystalline water, full of spirit, power and energy; but in Nature corrupted there is a water that is opposite to this, being without Light, Life, or purity, without spirituality or strength, and void of all benign efficacy. Wherefore as a stagnated pool remote from the sun beams, or as a dead insipid phlegm, is not to be regarded or valued, so likewise there is found a bright, living and crystalline earth (such as hath been, and such as will be, and such as is even at this time, when it appears not, except to some few) which is sometimes compared to fine silver, and is called the Salt of the Earth. And in this Blessed earth is locked up the Spirit, Energy and Seed of the Mineral and vegetable kingdoms in their purest constitution, yea and of the animal too. For that it contains in itself the Fire of Nature, by which the wheel of her Magia, according to all the seven forms and spirits is set to work. 
On the contrary there is a dull, dead and opaceous earth that is mixed more or less with all terrestrial subjects, and that may by Art be separated from them. This is the Curse of the Earth which must be taken away and dissolved, before the Blessed and new Earth can appear, wherefore it is called the Damned Earth.

Philochrysus: I hope you will not say that there is any of what the Chymists call Damned Earth in this our Gold. For I cannot bear the thought of it. Pray therefore explain yourself here a little.

Philadelphus: It is you yourself that make the particular application, for I did not. And indeed, Sir, I was almost afraid to touch you so near the quick. But if your Gold, Philochrysus, be a terrestrial subject (which you will scarce deny) then I am sure it must have some share of this Damned earth in it. For the Curse has not a command to stop when it came to a mine of Gold, but like a leaven it passed through and through, and infected the whole earth, and all that belonged to it. There might not indeed so much of it here abide as elsewhere, and therefore I said there was less of the Inherent Curse in this, than in any other subject of the same kingdom or order. Yet there is some, and that too very considerable, if either reason or experience may be allowed to pass the judgment. But this would lead us too far into a Philosophical disquisition. 
Let it suffice at present to consider whether what a vulgar and ordinary artist may be able to give an ocular demonstration of in the greatest part of earthly subjects, an expert master may not be as able to give the same in All? 
Wherefore be not angry, dear sir, at what I have asserted, but learn to bear the thought of what will be so much your disappointment, as to let you see the fair idol of your heart is not so lovely as you have imagined it to be, and that it is not all true gold that glisters in your hand.
There is a Damned Earth Terra Damnata et Maledicta that cleaves so fast to it, as is not (easily) to be separated by the refiners art. And I am informed from credible testimonies, that whosoever shall be understanding in heart and skillful in hand, to separate this vile earth from the precious Solar Earth in the body of Terrestrial Gold, shall find the quantity of the former (however small when compared to the inferior metals) to exceed the other. And if what is related concerning the degradation of Gold by an eminent and curious eye-witness of this nation, whom all the philosophical and Christian world stands obliged to (and who had this generous and noble design to vindicate Religion from all sectarian polity or partiality, and to establish it upon solid and immutable grounds, be true; and if also the daily experiments) made even in ordinary laboratories of the possibility of its supergradation and Exaltation, by losing in its weight, and so possessing an higher Tincture and Clarity, may deserve any credit: Then is it certain that it may still arrive to an higher degree both of Fixation and Purity, than it could ever meet with in the Bowels of the Accursed earth. 
But whether this can ever be quite set free from its Inherent Curse or no, is not so material to our present purpose. However there is a vein, I can assure you, of Paradisical Gold, which not having been with it infected, is by Moses pronounced to be good, (Genesis 2, 12). And yet even this is no more to be compared with the Philadelphian or Sionitical Gold, than the Peruvian is with it. Hereby you may, in part I hope apprehend what is meant both by the Blessing and the Curse, which are inherent in this Metallic body.

Philochrysus: I do, I think, pretty well understand you. But pray what do you mean by an Adherent Curse, and how is that to be appropriated to the Terrestrial Gold?

Philadelphus: The Adherent Curse is that which adheres or cleaves to the Creature, by external application, and not by Internal Constitution, or composition. And here by external application I mean not barely any outward abuse of the same whatever, but also (and chiefly) any degree of adhesion of the Human Soul to it, how intrinsic soever, and the more intrinsic still the more dangerous, it being foreign, incongruous, and extrinsic both to the Soul, and to the creature which she seeks to cleave as to her blessing. Now though your terrestrial Gold has indeed not so much of the inherent, yet has it far more of the Adherent Curse, which is much the worst of the two. And though it should be never so perfect as to its composition, that avails not if this other Curse sticks to it. Yea, on the contrary, this will be so much the greater and the heavier, as in the case of the Tartarization [2 Peter, 2, 4.] of those angels who kept not their first estate of adhesion to the Original Beauty and Goodness, and in that of the Golden Calf of Israel, concerning which the Jews have to this very day a celebrated proverb, that no punishment is ever inflicted upon them in which there is not some portion of this calf. And I fear the same may be justly applicable not to them alone. What Evil of Sin is there in the whole world that is not perpetrated for the sake of it? And what Evil of pain, or dreadful judgments by the Divine nemesis have not already been pulled down upon particular persons, upon families and upon whole kingdoms? Behold, and consider the times of old; what examples all histories both sacred and profane doth give you. To conclude, how many are there that for the sake of this, labour the greatest part of their lives in the very fire, who at length reap nought but smoke and dross, in the room of those Golden Mountains which they hereby imagined to themselves? And how many weary themselves all their lives for very vanity, while being deceived with the false show of an adhering blessing, they find only misery and repentance; who, had they taken but half that pains to discover the Paradisical or Philadelphian mine of Gold, would never have been left in such plunges at the last? Behold all this proceeds from its Adherent Curse. Remember, prithee Philochrysus, the dying aphorism of the richest Subject of the world at that time, as well as the best politician, and the most faithful servant; which famous aphorism is, I suppose, not unknown to you.

Philochrysus: You mean, I know the saying of that great man, which he left in his legacy to posterity: Had I but taken but half that pains to serve my God, as I took to serve my Prince, he would not now have deserted me.

Philadelphus: I do so. And withal I assure you, my good friend, that if you were but half as diligent in seeking after the celestial, as you are in seeking after the terrestrial Gold, you would be experimentally convinced that I have spoken nothing to you all this while but the very Truth, and you would find yourself possessed of substance instead of vanity.

Philochrysus: I am at a loss. I know not what to make of that which you say. Disturb me not out of my sleep. For I would rather dream on at the old rate, than be molested. Have pity on me, and depart from me. For I am Philochrysus. I am a lover of that what you have contemptibly nick-named terrestrial Gold. The which to me is a Celestial substance. But you will hardly allow it to be a substance at all, that so you may the more exalt the Gold (as you call it) of your own country, which I must call imaginary. Tell me not then that mine is vanity, or the shadow only of a substance. Neither speak to me of labouring for smoke and dross. I know what is substance, I thank my stars, and I can distinguish between what is true and what is counterfeit. Mine hath been tried in the Fire, and weighed in the balance. It hath stood in the one; and in the other hath been found to have its just weight. Can you also pretend to this?

Philadelphus: Yes, more than pretend. Mine is indeed Gold tried in the Fire, and it has been also weighed in the balance as well as yours. And let me tell you besides, that your gold shall never be able to endure this fire-trial, but shall fly away in it as lead and dross. And one grain of the Gold of my City if put into the balance will preponderate this whole room full of yours. Whence the Crown that is mad out of this Gold is called emphatically a weight of Glory and an Hyperbolical or excessive weight, yea a far exceeding and Hyperbolically Hyperbolical weight [2 Corinthians 4,17.] So far exceeds the celestial Gold in preponderosity the terrestrial Gold when weighed together, as no hyperbole can reach. It exceeds in like manner in clarity and lustre, in fixation and permanency, in the superexcellency of its Tincture, in ductibility and divisibility; and in all manner of medicinal uses both for Spirit, Soul and Body, all which it revives, exhilarates and perfects. And in the last place all the merchandise of your World is not to be compared with it. This alone can truly and really and lastingly make you rich. It would not be difficult to particularize each of these, and to show hereby the reality and substantiality of this Gold that I plead for, not only equally with, but far above that which is dug out of the Earth. But all that can be said hereupon, would but serve so much the more to exasperate you if you comprehend it not, or will not attend to it. In vain therefore would it be for me to give you (at present) a particular description of its several properties, as also of its constituent principles and the manner of their union. I must wait to do that till those senses which are fallen asleep in you shall come to be awakened. But I am therefore sent that I might rouse you out of your sleep. Forgive me that I thus wake you. O Philochrysus! what has become of the eye-salve of Sophia? Arise and anoint your eyes.

Philochrysus: Hold! I think I now begin to see. I must confess that I can now see the possibility of what you drive at, but that it is actually so, I cannot yet perceive. I remember I was once a little acquainted with one that might possibly be of your society, and I did hear him exclaim from the pulpit in this manner: "Think ye, ye shall be set up as pillars in the Temple of God to uphold it? or that you shall be full of gold in you pockets, of the finest gold tried in the Fire, like the rich men of the Earth? and to ruffle it in silks, and fine raiment as those in princes' courts? Do you think that these things are here meant in these promises made to the Seven Churches? No, No, dream of no such things, for I say there is not one word true according to the letter.

Philadelphus: I do say that every word, every syllable, every letter is true, and that there are real and substantial pillars in the Temple of God, real and substantial Gold in the City of God, and real and substantial raiment worn by the citizens thereof. And yet at the same time, I do assert that there is no Word, syllable or letter true, if strictly taken according to that low idea which the natural man has fixed to these words. For as much as there is a more than hyperbolical excess in the difference of one from the other. As each property by itself considered will manifest. And if you are convinced of the possibility (at least) of what I have said, you must acknowledge the actual existence hereof. For that there can be no other reason invented whereby you deny it, but its impossibility and inconsistency.

Philochrysus: I resign therefore, and yield to you, that the City of Philadelphia may be built of true, real and substantial Gold, which has nothing of the curse either Inherent or Adherent sticking to it, according to the sense that the describer means, or that you explain, though not according to that which the natural man would have.

Philadelphus: You comprehend me right. I shall therefore proceed. I said then, in the second place, that it is built of fine Gold, much more fine and higher graduated than any you can ever have seen. This you may in part already understand by what has been said hitherto. But here I shall much more stand in need of words whereby to express myself.

Philochrysus: I long greatly to hear you speak distinctly of this Superfine and supergraduated Gold. I shall not forget what you have said. Therefore proceed on.

Philadelphus: You need but remember your Gothic philosopher. Consider also that there is a twofold body, There is a material and elementary body, and there is an spiritual and a heavenly body. The one is gross, the other fine.

Philochrysus: I can understand perfectly what you mean by the former, but the notion of an immaterial body seems to me the very same contradiction as that of an immaterial substance seemed to an eminent asserter of materialism called Philautus. If you had but him to deal with, he would make work, I believe, with your non-elementary and spiritual body.

Philadelphus: It may be so. But I never feared the strength of reasoning in Philautus, though I know him pretty well, and all his principles whether in Philosophy, Divinity or politics are opposite to mine. He is the express character of the natural man throughout, and in his works everywhere you have the most lively image of the Fallen State of Nature, whereof great advantage may be made by the wise, it being no where that I know so deeply and philosophically handled. This indeed he mistakes for the true and original State of Nature; but herein he speaks well enough, and true enough, as a natural or animal Man, and without deviating, most exactly follows his principles wherever they lead him. On the other side the most learned and profound of all his answerers very admirably both describes and demonstrates the true and original state of Nature, such as it was, and such as it shall be again, but not such as it is at present. As for Philautus he is not dead, but lives in his disciples, and will live as long as the present corrupt state of Nature shall remain upon the Earth. For the Psyche in man is never able to penetrate beyond the image; only the pure spirit of Sophia can reach to the life, which is so imaged out in discourse. Hence he who had only the Psyche, was not able to distinguish betwixt the one and the other, but he took them both to be the same. So finding in the origination of several languages that a Spirit was imaged forth or signified by Breath, he presently concludes that the Spirit and Breath were one and the same, and consequently that all Spirits (as such) were material and corporeal beings. he in the like manner, finding in the verbal image of substance was expressed that which stands under, or props up somewhat, entertained immediately a most gross and sensible conception hereof, and tied it down to matter. So then nothing could be a greater absurdity to him, or a more manifest contradiction, than to believe an immaterial substance, that is an immaterial matter. Now among those who have a great and just abhorrence for his sentiments, all are not set free themselves from the very same method of argumentation, as from a numerous induction of instances might be verified if need were.
Wherefore I shall only beg of you what is highly necessary in order to your understanding of what I speak, and to your passing a judgment thereupon, that you content not yourself with the lax and popular sense of a word, as that which is generally very equivocal, but that you seek out the strict and close idea that is to be affixed to it, for the removal of all ambiguity in the terms, and the distinction of the image from its original, or (as the Schools would rather speak) of the Signum from Signatum, the sign from the thing signified.

Philochrysus: It is very just what you require, Phildelphus. None can gainsay this method, after what the celebrated author of An Essay on Human Understanding, together with a French philosopher of the first magnitude , have written on it, shall be looked into. Wherefore tell me in the first place, what you mean by Substance?

Philadelphus: Hereby I understand that which hath both Essence and Existence, being created by God, and made capable of bearing up, or supporting various modes of Being.

Philochrysus: What do you mean by Body?

Philadelphus: Hereby I understand a substance that is extended, and is capable of various modes of Extension. Two of which modes are penetrability and impenetrability.

Philochrysus: Is penetrability then a mode of extension? I always thought that all matter was impenetrable.

Philadelphus: True. All Matter is impenetrable, but all body is not. And penetrability is as much a mode of extension as impenetrability. For where there is no co-extension there is no penetration, and where there is no penetration there can be no life. Without therefore all Nature were dead, it remains that extended substances may be penetrated. Now there are extended substances, or rather one extended substance (of which I may speak to you hereafter) which can penetrate others, but which cannot be penetrated by any. There are also extended substances which can penetrate others by co-extension, and which may themselves also be penetrated by others. lastly there are extended substances or bodies which cannot penetrate others, but which may be penetrated by them. Thus by the outward light of this world, which is a body of the second order, the Earth may be penetrated, which can neither penetrate it or any other substance.

Philochrysus: What do you mean by Matter?

Philadelphus: Hereby I understand a body that is impenetrable, and divisible, and which is capable of various modes of division. So that all Matter is Body, but all Body is not Matter. By impenetrable I mean not that which cannot be at all penetrated, but I mean that which is not to be penetrated by any thing of its own order, and which itself can penetrate nothing.

Philochrysus: How can the same Body be impenetrable and divisible?

Philadelphus: Because it is impenetrable, therefore it is divisible into parts. For if it could be penetrated, then would there be no need of division, or separation of the parts? Wherefore that which is penetrable is also indivisible, or rather indiscerpible, and consequently incorruptible.

Philochrysus: I comprehend your meaning. And now I conceive what is your notion of an immaterial or Spiritual Body called likewise a Non-elementary (which is a Quintessential) or heavenly Body; Namely, that it is an extended substance, penetrable, penetrative, indivisible, indiscepible, and incorruptible. As on the contrary your notion of a material and elementary body must be this, that it is an extended substance, impenetrable, penetrated, divisible, discerpible and corruptible. I begin consequently to understand a little your notion of Material and Spiritual, of Elementary and Heavenly Gold, and why you call the one gross and the other fine Gold. But notwithstanding that I conceive how the Material and Elementary Gold is an extended Substance which is impenetrable to all terrestrial bodies, and may be penetrated by the Celestial, which is also divisible into parts, yea Discerpible into the minutest atoms, yet can I not easily yield that it should be corruptible.

Philadelphus: All that is compounded of Elements must be more or less corruptible. And though certain elementary bodies may have arrived at some degree of incorruptibility, yet it is but a degree, it being impossible for them to be ever perfectly freed from corruption, but by a dissolution and a resuscitation. For this is a most assured maxim, that all things must be perfected upon the cross and all things must be tried by Fire Without passing through the Cross there is no resurrection, without passing through the Fire there is no Fixation or Incorruption, no Purification or Spiritualization. Hence the messenger of the Covenant of Immortality is by a certain prophet compared to a refiners Fire, who saith of him that he shall purify the Priesthood and purge them as Gold that they may rightly offer the sacrifice of Minha to Jehovah. Hence also a great and wise King saith, the word (or outflowing emanation of the Lord is refined; and again he cries out Thy Word is exceedingly refined most fine and pure. And likewise this very Word of the Lord or the Word the Lord saith to the shepherds of Israel: I will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried. And elsewhere he saith, I have refined thee melted thee down, and then brought thee out of the furnace. For this cause the precious Sons of Zion are compared to fine gold, and the Angelical man who appeared to Daniel had his loins Girded with fine Gold of Ophir. From this also an account may be given why the Altar of Incense was made of refined Gold, together with the Ark and the Cherubims, also why Wisdom's oracle is so often compared to fine Gold; and lastly why the Shulamite describes both the head and the feet of her beloved to be as of fine Gold, that is such an indivisible, indiscerpible and incorruptible substance, as being extended is therefore a body, and as possessing all the properties of the material and gross Gold, is therefore a spiritual body, or immaterial and celestial gold.

Philochrysus: I must confess that I have always taken a spiritual body to be a contradiction in terms, for I never heard otherwise before but that Spirit and Body were contraries. But now I begin to mistrust that I have not been used rightly to apply ideas to words.

Philadelphus: Your diffidence is well grounded. For I do not find that Spirit and Body are anywhere opposed as contraries in those writings which command the greatest authority and deference above all others to them. I find indeed frequently spirit and flesh to be set as opposites, but spirit and body never. Nay I find it there expressly asserted that there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. And so in like manner there is a natural Gold and there is a spiritual, which surpasseth the former, as the spiritual Body of the Resurrection doth this Natural and Elementary body which we now wear about us. Moreover the same highly mystic author tells those who being immersed in the flesh had no notion of a Spiritual or Heavenly Body, any more than you had.

Philochrysus: There are also Celestial Bodies (of a spiritual and heavenly property) and Bodies Terrestrial (of a material and earthly property as common gold but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the glory of the Terrestrial is another; that is, the glory of the Philadelphian Gold differs from the glory of the Peruvian, as far as heaven is from Earth.

Philochrysus: You extremely amaze me, good Philadelphus, to tell me that the City from whence you are named is built of such fine gold. But pray now go on, if you are not weary, to satisfy me in the third place, whether it be built of Transparent and Glassy Gold.

Philadelphus: Be not over hasty, but take time to meditate upon what I (through the assistance of the Good Spirit) have freely communicated to you. Neither have I done yet with the former, for I am not yet come to the top of the ladder with you. Perhaps your head may be giddy in endeavouring to reach it at this present. Wherefore though I cannot be ever weary of discoursing these matters, yet I will now take my leave of you with one parallel instance, which you may digest against we meet the next time. Consider what difference there is betwixt the faeces of any terrestrial subject, from which the spirit is separated, and the Spirit itself of that very subject (which is a Spiritual Body) when seven times rectified; and hereby as in a glass you may discern how far that Gross and Earthly Gold I am speaking of, wherewith the Holy City of my brethren is built. In the meanwhile I shall leave with you this Hieroglyphical figure of a star being the mark of this Gold, and also of the city, showing its constituent parts the Water and Fire of the Philadelphians; it manifold and wonderful properties, how it is formed, and how it is made to multiply itself.
Stibium, as the Philosophers say, is composed from the noble mineral Sulphur, and they have praised it as the black lead of the Wise. The Arabs in their language, have called it Asinat vel Azinat, the alchemists retain the name Antimonium. It will however lead to the consideration of high Secrets, if we seek and recognize the nature in which the Sun is exalted, as the Magi found that this mineral was attributed by God to the Constellation Aries, which is the first heavenly sign in which the Sun takes its exaltation or elevation to itself. Although such things are thrown to the winds by common people, intelligent people ought to know and pay more attention to the fact that exactly at this point the infinitude of secrets may be partly contemplated with great profit and in part also explored. Many, but these are ignorant and unintelligent, are of the opinion that if they only had Stibium, they would get to it by Calcination, others by Sublimation, several by Reverberation and Extraction, and obtain its great Secret, Oil, and Perfectum Medicinam. But I tell you, that here in this place nothing will help, whether Calcination, Sublimation, Reverberation nor Extraction, so that subsequently a perfect Extraction of metallic virtue that translates the inferior into the superior, may profitably come to pass or be accomplished. For such shall be impossible for you. Do not let yourselves be confused by several of the philosophers who have written of such things, i.e., Geber, Albertus Magnus, Rhasis, Rupecilla, Aristoteles and many more of that kind. And this you should note. Yes, many say, that when one prepares Stibium to a glass, then the evil volatile Sulphur will be gone, and the Oil, which may be prepared from the glass, would be a very fixed oil, and would then truly give an ingress and Medicine of imperfect metals to perfection. These words and opinions are perhaps good and right, but that it should be thus in fact and prove itself, this will not be. For I say to you truly, without any hidden speech; if you were to lose some of the above mentioned Sulphur by the preparation and the burning, as a small fire may easily damage it, so that you have lost the right penetrating spirit, which should make our whole Antimonii corpus into a perfect red oil, so that it also can ascend over the helm with a sweet smell and very beautiful colors and the whole body of this mineral with all its members, without loss of any weight, except for the foecum, shall be an oil and go over the helm. And note also this: How would it be possible for the body to go into an oil, or give off its sweet oil, if it is put into the last essence and degree? For glass is in all things the outermost and least essence. For you shall know that all creatures at the end of the world, or on the last and coming judgement of the last day, shall become glass or a lovely amethyst and this according to the families of the twelve Patriarchs, as in the families of jewels which Hermes the Great describes in his book: As we have elaborately reported and taught in our book de Cabala.

You shall also know that you shall receive the perfect noble red oil, which serves for the translation of metals in vain, if you pour acetum correctum over the Antimonium and extract the redness. Yes not even by Reverberation, and even if its manifold Beautiful colors show themselves, this will not make any difference and is not the right way. You may indeed obtain and make an oil out of it, but it has no perfect force and virtue for transmutation or translation of the imperfect metals into perfection itself. This you must certainly know.

AND NOW WE PROCEED TO THE MANUAL LABOUR, AND THUS THE PRACTICA FOLLOWS.
Take in the Name of God and the Holy Trinity, fine and well cleansed Antimonii ore, which looks nice, white, pure and internally full of yellow rivulets or veins. It may also be full of red and blue colors and veins, which will be the best. Pound and grind to a fine powder and dissolve in a water or Aqua Regis, which will be described below, finely so that the water may conquer it. And note that you should take it out quite soon after the solution so that the water may conquer it. And note that you should take it out quite soon after the solution so that the water will have no time to damage it, since it quickly dissolves the Antimonii Tincture. For in its nature our water is like the ostrich, which by its heat digests and consumes all iron; for given time, the water would consume it and burn it to naught, so that it would only remain as an idle yellow earth, and then it would be quite spoilt.
Consider by comparison Luna, beautiful clean and pure, dissolved in this our water. And let it remain therein for no more than a single night when the water is still strong and full of Spirit,

And I tell you, that your good Luna has then been fundamentally consumed and destroyed and brought to nought in this our water.

And if you want to reduce it to a pure corpus again, then you will not succeed, but it will remain for you as a pale yellow earth, and occasionally it may run together in the shape of a horn or white horseshoe, which may not be brought to a corpus by any art.

Therefore you must remember to take the Antimonium out as soon as possible after the Solution, and precipitate it and wash it after the custom of the alchemists, so that the matter with its perfect oil is not corroded and consumed by the water.

THE WATER; WHEREIN WE DISSOLVE THE ANTIMONIUM, IS MADE THUS:
Take Vitriol one and a half (alii 2. lb.) Sal armoniac one pound, Arinat (alii Alun) one half pound / Sal niter one and a half pound, Sal gemmae (alii Sal commune) one pound, Alumen crudum (alii Entali) one half pound. These are the species that belong to and should be taken for the Water to dissolve the Antimonium.
Take these Species and mix them well among each other, and distill from this a water, at first rather slowly. For the Spiritus go with great force,, more than in other strong waters. And beware of its spirits, for they are subtle and harmful in their penetration.

When you now have the dissolved Antimony, clean and well sweetened, and its sharp waters washed out, so that you do not notice any sharpness any more, then put into a clean vial and overpour it with a good distilled vinegar. Then put the vial in Fimum Equinum, or Balneum Mariae, to putrefy forty (al.i four) days and nights, and it will dissolve and be extracted red as blood. Then take it out and examine how much remains to be dissolved, and decant the clear and pure, which will have a red colour, very cautiously into a glass flask. Then pour fresh vinegar onto it, and put it into Digestion as before, so that that which may have remained with the faecibus, it should thus have ample time to become dissolved. Then the faeces may be discarded, for they are no longer useful, except for being scattered over the earth and thrown away. Afterwards pour all the solutions together into a glass retort, put into Balneum Mariae, and distill the sharp vinegar rather a fresh one, since the former would be too weak, and the matter will very quickly become dissolved by the vinegar. Distill it off again, so that the matter remains quite dry. Then take common distilled water and wash away all sharpness, which has remained with the matter from the vinegar, and then dry the matter in the sun, or otherwise by a gentle fire, so that it becomes well dried. It will then be fair to behold, and have a bright red color. The Philosophers, when they have thus prepared our Antimonium in secret, have remarked how its outermost nature and power has collapsed into its interior, and its interior thrown out and has now become an oil that lies hidden in its innermost and depth, well prepared and ready. And henceforth it cannot, unto the last judgement, be brought back to its first essence. And this is true, for it has become so subtle and volatile, that as soon as it senses the power of fire, it flies away as a smoke with all its parts because of its volatility.

Several poor and common Laborers, when they have prepared the Antimonium thus, have taken one part out, to take care of their expenses, so that they may more easily do the rest of the work and complete it, They then mixed it with one part Salmiac, one part Vitro (alii. Nitro, alii. Titro), one part Rebohat, to cleanse the Corpera, and then proceeded to project this mixture onto a pure Lunam. And if the Luna was one Mark, they found two and a half Loth good gold after separation; sometimes even more. And therewith they had accomplished a work providing for their expenses, so that they might even better expect to attain to the Great Work. And the foolish called this a bringing into the Lunam, but they are mistaken. For such gold is not brought in by the Spiritibus (alii. Speciebus), but any Luna contains two Mark gold to the Loth, some even more. But this gold is united to the Lunar nature to such a degree that it may not be separated from it, neither by Aquafort, nor by common Antimonium, as the goldsmiths know. When however the just mentioned mixture is thrown onto the Lunam in flux, then such a separation takes place that the Luna quite readily gives away her implanted gold either in Aquafort or in Regal, and lets herself separate from it, strikes it to the ground and precipitates it, which would or might otherwise not happen. Therefore it is not a bringing into the Lunam, but a bringing out of the Luna.

But we are coming back to our Proposito and purpose of our work, for we wish to have the Oil, which has only been known and been acquainted with this magistry, and not by the foolish.

When you then have the Antimonium well rubified according to the above given teaching, then you shall take a well rectified Spiritum vini, and pour it over the red powder of Antimony, put it in a gentle Balneum Mariae to dissolve for four days and nights, so that everything becomes well dissolved. If however something should remain behind, you overpour the same with fresh Spiritu vini, and put it into the Balneum Mariae again, as said before, and everything should become well dissolved. And in case there are some more faeces there, but there should be very little, do them away, for they are not useful for anything. The Solutiones put into a glass retort, lute on a helm and connect it to a receiver, also well luted, to receive the Spiritus. Put it into Balneum Mariae. Thereafter you begin, in the Name of God, to distill very leisurely at a gentle heat, until all the Spiritus Vini has come over. You then pour the same Spiritum that you have drawn off, back onto the dry matter, and distill it over again as before. And this pouring on and distilling off again, you continue so often until you see the Spiritum vini ascend and go over the helm in all kinds of colours. Then it is time to follow up with a strong fire, and a noble blood red Oleum will ascend, go through the tube of the helm and drip into the recipient. Truly, this is the most secret way of the Wise to distill the very highly praised oil of Antimonii, and it is a noble, powerful, fragrant oil of great virtue, as you will hear below in the following. But here I wish to teach and instruct you who are poor and without means to expect the Great Work in another manner; not the way the ancients did it by separating the gold from the Luna. Therefore take this oil, one lot, [ancient weight unit used for the weighing of gold and silver coins - about 1/30 pound] eight lot of Saturn calcined according to art, and carefully imbibe the oil, drop by drop, while continuously stirring the calx Saturni. Then put it ten days and nights in the heat, in the furnace of secrets, and let the fire that this furnace contains, increase every other day by one degree. The first two days you give it the first degree of fire, the second two days you give it the second degree, and after four days and nights you put it into the third degree of fire and let it remain there for three days and nights. After these three days you open the window of the fourth degree, for which likewise three days and nights should be sufficient. Then take it out, and the top of the Saturnus becomes very beautiful and of a reddish yellow colour. This should be melted with Venetian Boreas. When this has been done, you will find that the power of our oil has changed it to good gold. Thus you will again have subsistence, so that you may better expect the Great Work. We now come back to our purpose where we left it earlier. Above you have heard, and have been told to distill the Spiritum vini with the Oleum Antimonii over the helm into the recipient as well as the work of changing the Saturnum into gold. But now we wish to make haste and report about the second tinctural work. Here it will be necessary to separate the Spiritum vini from the oil again, and you shall know that it is done thus:

Take the mixture of oil and wine spirit put it into a retort, put on a helm, connect a receiver and place it all together into the Balneum Mariae. Then distill all the Spiritum vini from the oil, at a very gentle heat, until you are certain that no more Spiritus vini is to be found within this very precious oil. And this will be easy to check; for when you see several drops of Spiritu vini ascend over the helm and fall into the recipient, this is the sign that the Spiritus vini has become separated from the oil. Then remove the fire from the Balneo, though it was very small, so that it may cool all the sooner. Now remove the recipient containing the Spiritu vini, and keep it in a safe place, for it is full of Spiritus which it has extracted from the oil and retained. It also contains admirable virtues, as you will hear hereafter.

But in the Balneo you will find the blessed bloodred Oleum Antimonii in the retort, which should be taken out very carefully. The helm must be very slowly removed, taking care to soften and wash off the Lute, so that no dirt falls down into the beautiful red oil and makes it turbid. This oil you must store with all possible precaution so that it receives no damage. For you now have a Heavenly Oil that shines on a dark night and emits light as from a glowing coal. And the reason for this is that its innermost power and soul has become thrown out unto the outermost, and the hidden soul is now revealed and shines through the pure body as a light through a lantern: Just as on Judgement Day our present invisible and internal souls will manifest through our clarified bodies, that in this life are impure and dark, but the soul will then be revealed and seen unto the outermost of the body, and will shine as the bright sun. Thus you now have two separate things: Both the Spirit of Wine full of force and wonder in the arts of the human body: And then the blessed red, noble, heavenly Oleum Antimonii, to translate all diseases of the imperfect metals to the Perfection of gold. And the power of the Spiritual Wine reaches very far and to great heights. For when it is rightly used according to the Art of Medicine: I tell you, you have a heavenly medicine to prevent and to cure all kinds of diseases and ailments of the human body. And its uses are thus, as follows:

AGAINST PODAGRA or GOUT
In the case of gout one should let three drops of this Spiritu vini, that has received the power of the Antimony, fall into a small glass of wine. This has to be taken by the patient on an empty stomach at the very moment in time when he sense the beginning or arrival of his trouble, bodily ailment and pain. On the next day and afterwards on the third day it should also be taken and used in the same way. On the first day it takes away all pain, however great it may be, and prevents swelling. On the second day it causes a sweat that is very inconstant, viscous and thick, that smells and tastes quite sour and offensive, and occurs mostly where the joints and limbs are attached. On the third day, regardless of whether any medicine has been taken, a purging takes place of the veins into the bowels, without any inconvenience, pain or grief. And this demonstrates a great power of Nature.
AGAINST LEPROSY
To begin with the patient is given six drops on an empty stomach. And arrange it so that the unclean person is alone without the company of any healthy people, in a separate and convenient place. For his whole body will soon begin to smoke and steam with a stinking mist or vapor. And on the second day his skin will start to flake and much uncleanliness will detach itself from his body. He should then have three more drops of the medicine ready, which he should take and use in solitude on the fourth day. Then on the eighth or ninth day, by means of this medicine and through the bestowal of Divine mercy and blessing, he will be completely cleansed and his health restored.
AGAINST APOPLEXIA OR STROKE
In the case of stroke, let a drop of the unadmixed tincture fall onto the tongue of the person in need. At once it will raise itself and distribute itself like a mist or smoke, and rectify and dissolve the struck part. But if the stroke has hit the body or other members, he should be given three drops at the same time in a glass of good wine, as previously taught in the case of Podagra.
AGAINST HYDROPE OR DROPSY
In the case of dropsy give one drop each day for six days in a row, in Aqua Melissae or Valerianae. On the seventh day give three drops in good wine. Then it is enough.
AGAINST EPILEPSIA, CATALEPSIA, & ANALEPSIA.
In case of the falling sickness, give him two drops at the beginning of the Paroxismi in Aqua Salviae, and after three hours again two drops. This will suffice. But if further symptoms should occur, then give him two more drops as above.
AGAINST HECTIC
In case of consumption and dehydration, give him two drops in Aqua Violarum the first day. On the second day, give him two more drops in good wine.
AGAINST FEVER
In cases of all kinds of hot fevers, give him three drops in a well distilled St. Johnswort water or Cichorii at the beginning of the Paroxismi. Early in the morning on the following day, again give him three drops in good wine on an empty stomach.
AGAINST PEST
In the case of pestilence give the patient seven drops in a good wine, and see to it that the infected person is all by himself, and caused to sweat. Then this poison will, with Divine assistance, do him no harm.
FOR THE PROLONGATION AND MAINTENANCE OF A HEALTHY LIFE.
Take and give at the beginning and entry of spring, when the sun has entered the sign of Aries, two drops; and at the beginning with God's help, be safe and protected against bad health and poisoned air, unless the incurred disease was predestined and fatally imposed upon man by the Almighty God.
But we now wish to proceed to the Oleum Antimonii and its Power, and show how this oil may also help the diseased and imperfect metallic bodies. Take in the Name of God, very pure refined gold, as much as you want and think will suffice. Dissolve it in a rectified Wine, prepared the way one usually makes Aquam Vitae. And after the gold has become dissolved, let it digest for a month. Then put it into a Balneum, and distill off the spiritum vini very slowly and gently. Repeat this several times, as long and as often until you see that your gold remains behind in fundo as a sap. And such is the manner and opinion of several of the ancients on how this oil may also help the diseased and imperfect metallic bodies.

Take, in the Name of God, very pure refined gold, as much as you want and think will suffice. Dissolve it in a rectified Wine, prepared the way one usually makes Aquam Vitae. And after the gold has become dissolved, let it digest for a month. Then put it into a Balneum, and distill off the spiritum vini very slowly and gently. Repeat this several times, as long and as often until you see that your gold remains behind in fundo as a sap. And such is the manner and opinion of several of the ancients on how to prepare the gold. But I will show and teach you a much shorter, better and more useful way. Viz. that you instead of such prepared gold take one part Mercurii Solis, the preparation of which I have already taught in another place by its proper process. Draw off its airy water so that it becomes a subtle dust and calx. Then take two parts of our blessed oil, and pour the oil very slowly, drop by drop onto the dust of the Mercurii Solis, until everything has become absorbed. Put it in a vial, well sealed, into a heat of the first degree of the oven of secrets, and let it remain there for ten days and nights. You will then see your powder and oil quite dry, such that it has become a single piece of dust of a blackish grey colour. After ten days give it the second degree of heat, and the grey and black colour will slowly change into a whiteness so that it becomes more or less white. And at the end of these ten days, the matter will take on a beautiful rose white. But this may be ignored. For this colour is only due to the Mercurio Solis, that has swallowed up our blessed oil, and now covers it with the innermost part of its body. But by the power of the fire, our oil will again subdue such Mercurium Solis, and throw it into its innermost. And the oil with its very bright red colour will rule over it and remain on the outside. Therefore it is time, when twenty years (sic) have passed, that you open the window of the third degree [The alchemical ovens had small openings at different heights, by means of which the heat was regulated.] The external white colour and force will then completely recede inwardly, and the internal red colour will, by the force of the fire, become external. Keep also this degree of fire for ten days, without increase or decrease. You will then see your powder, that was previously white, now become very red. But for the time being this redness may be ignored (is of no consequence), for it is still unfixed and volatile; and at the end of these ten days, when the thirtieth day has passed, you should open the last window of the fourth degree of fire, Let it stay in this degree for another ten days, and this very bright red powder will begin to melt. Let it stay in flux for these ten days. And when you take it out you will find on the bottom a very bright red and transparent stone, ruby colored, melted into the shape of the vial. This stone may be used for Projection, as has been taught in the tract on Vitriol. Praise God in Eternity for this His high revelation, and thank Him in Eternity. Amen.

ON THE MULTIPLICATION LAPIDIS STIBII.
The ancient sages, after they had discovered this stone and prepared it to perfect power and translation of the imperfect metals to gold, long sought to discover a way to increase the power and efficiency of this stone. And they found two ways to multiply it: One is a multiplication of its power, such that the stone may be brought much further in its power of Transmutation. And this multiplication is very subtle, the description of which may be found in the Tract on Gold. The second multiplication is an Augmentum quantitatis of the stone with its former power, in such a way that it neither loses any of its power, nor gains any, but in such a manner that its weight increases and keeps on increasing ever more, so that a single ounce grows and increases to many ounces. To achieve this increase or Multiplication one has to proceed in the following manner: Take in the Name of God, your stone, and grind it to a subtle powder, and add as much Mercurii Solis as was taught before. Put these together into a round vial, seal with sigillo Hermetis, and put it into the former oven exactly as taught, except that the time has to be shorter and less now. For where you previously used ten (alii thirty) days, you may now not use more than four (alii ten) days. In other respects the work is exactly the same as before. Praise and thank God the Almighty for His high revelation, and diligently continue your prayers fir His Almighty Mercy and Divine blessings of this Work and Art as well as His granting you a good health and fortuitous welfare. And moreover, take care always to help and counsel the poor.
IN the month of December, 1894, I was invited by M. Aug. Lemaître, Professor of the College of Geneva, to attend some seances of a non-professional medium, receiving no compensation for her services, and of whose extraordinary gifts and apparently supernormal faculties I had frequently heard.

Having gladly accepted the invitation of my worthy colleague, I found the medium in question, whom I shall call Mlle. Hélène Smith, to be a beautiful woman about thirty years of age, tall, vigorous, of a fresh, healthy complexion, with hair and eyes almost black, of an open and intelligent countenance, which at once invoked sympathy. She evinced nothing of the emaciated or tragic aspect which one habitually ascribes to the sibyls of tradition, but wore an air of health, of physical and mental

p. 2

vigor, very pleasant to behold, and which, by-the-way, is not often encountered in those who are good mediums.

The number of those invited to take part in the seance being complete, we seated ourselves in a circle, with our hands resting upon the traditional round table of spiritistic circles. Mlle. Smith—who possesses a triple mediumship: visual, auditive, and typtological *—began, in the most natural manner, to describe the various apparitions which passed before her eyes in the partially darkened room. Suddenly she stops and listens; she hears a name spoken in her ear, which she repeats to us with astonishment; then brief sentences, the words of which are spelled out by raps on the table, explain the meaning of the vision. Speaking for myself alone (there were three of us to divide the honor of the seance), I was greatly surprised to recognize in scenes which passed before my eyes events which had transpired in my own family prior to my birth. Whence could the medium, whom I had never met before, have derived the knowledge of events belonging to a remote past, of a private nature, and utterly unknown to any living person?

The astounding powers of Mrs. Piper, the famous Boston medium, whose wonderful intuition reads the latent memories of her visitors like an open book, recurred to my mind, and I went out from that seance with renewed hope of finding myself some day face to face with the "supernormal"—a true and genuine

p. 3

supernormal—telepathy, clairvoyance, spiritistic manifestations, it matters not by what name it be called, provided only that it be wholly out of the ordinary, and that it succeed in utterly demolishing the entire framework of established present-day science.

I was able at this time to obtain general information only concerning the past of Mlle. Smith, but it was all of a character favorable to her, and has since been fully confirmed.

Of modest bearing and an irreproachable moral character, she has for years earned an honorable living as an employée of a commercial house, in which her industry, her perseverance, and her high character have combined to secure her a very responsible and important position.

Some three years prior to the date of my introduction to her she had been initiated into a spiritistic group, where her remarkable psychic powers almost immediately manifested themselves; and she then became a member of various other spiritistic circles. From its commencement her mediumship manifested the complex type to which I have already alluded, and from which it has never deviated. Visions in a waking state, accompanied by typtological dictation and auditive hallucinations, alternately appeared. From the point of view of their content these messages had generally a bearing on past events usually unknown to the persons present, but which were always verified by referring to biographical dictionaries or to the traditions of the families interested. To these phenomena of retrocognition

p. 4

or of hypermnesia were joined occasionally, according to the environment, moral exhortations, communicated through the table, more frequently in poetry than in prose, addressed to the sitters; medical consultations, accompanied by prescriptions generally appropriate; communications from parents or friends recently deceased; or, finally, revelations as piquant as they were unverifiable concerning the antériorités (that is, the previous existences) of the sitters, almost all of whom, being profound believers in spiritism, would not have been at all surprised to learn that they were the reincarnations respectively of Coligny, of Vergniaud, of the Princess Lamballe, or of other notable personages. It is necessary, finally, to add that all these messages seemed to be more or less bound up with the mysterious presence of a "spirit" answering to the name of Leopold, who assumed to be the guide and protector of the medium.

I at once undertook to improve my acquaintance with Hélène Smith. She freely consented to give seances for my benefit, alternating with a series which she was giving M. Lemaître, and another for the benefit of Prof. Cuendet, vice-president of the Geneva Society (spiritistic) for Psychic Studies, all of which I was permitted to attend. In this way I have been able to be present at the greater part of Hélène's seances during the past five years. The personal observations that I have thus been able to make, reinforced by notes on sittings which I was unable to attend, kindly furnished me by MM. Lemaître and Cuendet, form the basis of the study

p. 5

which follows; to which must be added, however, certain letters of Mlle. Smith, as well as the numerous and very interesting conversations I have held with her either immediately preceding or following her seances, or at her home, where I also have had the advantage of being able to talk with her mother. Finally, various documents and accessory information, which will be cited in their respective time and place, have also been of assistance in enabling me partially to elucidate certain obscure points. Notwithstanding all these sources of information, however, I am still very far from being able to disentangle and satisfactory explain the complex phenomena which constitute Hélène's mediumship.

Dating from the period at which I made the acquaintance of Mlle. Smith (i.e., from the winter of 1894-95), while most of her spiritistic communications have continued to present he same character as to form and content as before, a double and very important modification in her mediumship has been observed.

1. As to their psychological form.—While up to that time Hélène had experienced partial and limited automatisms only—visual, auditive, typtomotor hallucinations—compatible with the preservation to a certain extent of the waking state, and not involving noticeable loss of memory, from that time and with increasing frequency she has been subject to an entire loss of consciousness and a failure to retain, on returning to her normal state, any recollection of what has transpired during the seance. In physiological terms, the hemisomnambulism without amnesia,

p. 6

which had been her stopping-point up to that time, and which the sitters mistook for the ordinary waking state, was now transformed into total somnambulism with consecutive amnesia.

In spiritistic parlance, Mlle. Smith now became completely entranced, and having formerly been an ordinary visual and auditive medium, she now advanced to the higher plane of an "incarnating medium."

I fear that this change must in a great measure be attributed to my influence, since it followed almost immediately upon my introduction to Hélène's seances. Or, even if the total somnambulism would have inevitably been eventually developed by virtue of an organic predisposition and of a tendency favorable to hypnoid states, it is nevertheless probable that I aided in hastening its appearance by my presence as well as by a few experiments which I permitted myself to make upon Hélène.

As is well known, mediums are usually surrounded by a halo of veneration, which prevents any one from touching them during their trances The idea would never occur to any ordinary frequenter of spiritistic circles to endeavor to ascertain the condition of the medium's sensory and motor functions by feeling her hands, pinching the flesh, or pricking the skin with a pin. Silence and immobility are the strict rule, in order not to hinder the spontaneous production of the phenomena, and a few questions or brief observations on the receipt of a message is all that is permissible by way of conversation, and no one therefore would, under ordinary circumstances, dare

p. 7

to attempt any manipulation of the medium Mlle. Smith had always been surrounded by this respectful consideration, and during the first three seances I conformed myself strictly to the passive and purely contemplative attitude of the other sitters. But at the fourth sitting my discretion vanished. I could not resist a strong desire to ascertain the physiological condition of the charming seeress, and I made some vigorous elementary experiments upon her hands, which lay temptingly spread out opposite me on the table. These experiments, which I renewed and followed up at the succeeding seance (February 3, 1895), demonstrated that there is present in Mlle. Smith, during her visions, a large and varied assortment of sensory and motor disturbances which had hitherto escaped the notice of the sitters, and which are thoroughly identical with those that may be observed in cases of hysteria (where they are more permanent), and those that may be momentarily produced in hypnotic subjects by suggestion. This was not at all astonishing, and was to have been expected. But one consequence, which I had not foreseen, did occur when, four days after my second experimental seance, Mlle. Smith fell completely asleep for the first time at a sitting with M. Cuendet (February 7th), at which I was not present. The sitters were somewhat frightened, and, in trying to awaken her, discovered the rigidity of her arms, which were considerably contractured. Leopold however, communicating by means of the table upon which she was leaning, fully reassured them, and gave them to understand that such sleep was not at

p. 8

all prejudicial to the medium. After assuming various attitudes and indulging in some amusing mimicry, Mlle. Smith awoke in excellent spirits, retaining as a last recollection of her dream that of a kiss which Leopold had imprinted upon her forehead.

From that day on somnambulisms were the rule with Hélène, and the seances at which she did not fall completely asleep for at least a few moments formed rare exceptions to the course of events during the next four years. It is a great deprivation for Mlle. Smith that these slumbers ordinarily leave her no memory upon her awakening of what has transpired in her trance, and she longs for the seances of former times when the visions unfolded themselves before her eyes, furnishing her with a pleasing spectacle which was always unexpected, and which, continually being renewed, caused the seances to be to her a source of great delight. For the sitters, on the other hand, these scenes of somnambulism and incarnation, together with the various physiological phenomena of catalepsy, lethargy, contractures, etc., which accompanied them, added great variety and additional interest to Hélène Smith's remarkable and instructive triple mediumship.

The greater sometimes implies the less: simultaneously with the access of complete somnambulism came new forms and innumerable shades of hemisomnambulism. The triple form of automatism which distinguished the first years of Mlle. Smith's spiritistic experiences has been wonderfully developed since 1895, and it would now be difficult to name any principal forms of psychic mediumship of which

p. 9

she has not furnished curious specimens. I shall have occasion to cite several of them in the course of this work. Hélène constitutes the most remarkable medium I have ever met, and very nearly approaches the ideal of what might be called the polymorphous, or multiform, medium, in contradistinction to the uniform mediums, whose faculties only concern themselves with one kind of automatism.

2. A modification analogous to that which took place in the psychologic form of the messages consisting of a marked improvement in their depth and importance, was noticeable simultaneously in their content.

Alongside of the unimportant communications, complete at one sitting and independent one of another, which filled up a large part of each of Hélène's seances and in no wise differentiated her faculties from those of the majority of mediums, she manifested from the beginning a marked tendency. to a superior systematization and a more lofty chain of visions; communications were often continued through several seances, and reached their conclusion only at the end of several weeks. But from the period at which I made the acquaintance of Mlle. Smith this tendency towards unity began to assert itself still more strongly. Several long somnambulistic dreams began to appear and to develop, the events of which continued to be unfolded through months, even years, and indeed still continue; a species of romance of the subliminal imagination analogous to those "continued stories" which so many of our race tell themselves in their moments of far niente, or at times when their routine

p. 10

occupations offer only slight obstacles to day-dreaming, and of which they themselves are generally the heroes.

Mlle. Smith has no fewer than three distinct somnambulistic romances, and if to these is added the existence of that secondary personality to which I have already alluded, and which reveals itself under the name of Leopold, we find ourselves in the presence of four subconscious creations of vast extent, which have been evolved on parallel lines for several years, and which manifest themselves in irregular alternation during the course of different seances, or often even in the same seance.

All of these have undoubtedly a common origin in Hélène's subliminal consciousness; but in practice, at least, and to all appearance, these imaginative constructions present a relative independence and a diversity of content sufficiently great to render it necessary to study them separately. I shall confine myself at present to a general view of them.

Two of these romances are connected with the spiritistic idea of previous existences. It has, indeed, been revealed that Hélène Smith has already lived twice before on this globe. Five hundred years ago she was the daughter of an Arab sheik, and became, under the name of Simandini, the favorite wife of a Hindoo prince named Sivrouka Nayaka, who reigned over Kanara, and built in the year 1401 the fortress of Tchandraguiri. In the last century she reappeared in the person of the illustrious and unfortunate Marie Antoinette. Again reincarnated, as a punishment for her sins and the perfecting of her character, in

p. 11

the humble circumstances of Hélène Smith, she in certain somnambulistic states recovers the memory of her glorious avatars of old, and becomes again for the moment Hindoo princess or queen of France.

I will designate under the names of "Hindoo" or "Oriental" cycle and "Royal" cycle the whole of the automatic manifestations relative to these two previous existences. I shall call the third romance the " Martian" cycle, in which Mlle. Smith, by virtue of the mediumistic faculties, which are the appanage and the consolation of her present life, has been able to enter into relation with the people and affairs of the planet Mars, and to unveil their mysteries to us. It is in this astronomical somnambulism that the phenomenon of glossolalia, * appears, which consists of the fabrication and the use of an unknown language, and which is one of the principal objects of this study; we shall see, however, that analogous facts are likewise presented in the Hindoo cycle.

The personality of Leopold maintains very complex relations with the preceding creations. On the one hand, it is very closely connected with the Royal cycle, owing to the fact that the name of Leopold is only a pseudonym under which is concealed the illustrious Cagliostro, who, it appears, was madly infatuated with Queen Marie Antoinette, and who now, discarnate and floating in space, has constituted himself the guardian angel in some respects of Mile. Smith, in whom after a long search he has again

p. 12

found the august object of his unhappy passion of a century ago.

On the other hand, this rôle of protector and spiritual guide which he assumes towards Hélène confers upon him a privileged place in her somnambulisms. He is more or less mixed up in the greater part of them; assists at them, watches over them, and perhaps in a measure directs them. He also occasionally appears in the midst of a Hindoo or a Martian scene, delivering his message by certain characteristic movements of the hand.

To sum up: sometimes revealing himself by raps upon the table, the taps of a finger, or by automatic writing; sometimes incarnating himself completely and speaking by the mouth of Mlle. Smith while entranced—Leopold fulfils in these seances the multiple and varied functions of spirit-guide, giving good advice relative to the manner of acting towards the medium; of stage-manager hidden behind the scenes watching the performance and ready at any time to intervene; of benevolently disposed interpreter willing to furnish explanations of all that is obscure; of censor of morals sharply reprimanding the sitters when he deems it necessary; of sympathetic physician prompt at diagnosis and well versed in the pharmacopoeia, etc. He also appears under his own name of Cagliostro to the somnambulistic gaze of the resuscitated Marie Antoinette and answers her questions by means of auditive hallucinations. Nor is this all: to make our summary complete, it is necessary also to investigate the personal connection of Mlle. Smith with her invisible protector. She

p. 13

often invokes and questions Leopold at her own convenience, and while he remains sometimes for weeks without giving any sign of life, he at other times readily responds to her by means of voices or visions which surprise her while fully awake in the course of her daily duties, and in which he lavishes upon her in turn material or moral advice, useful information, or the encouragement and consolation of which she has need.

Although I have accused myself of perhaps having had much to do with the transformation of Hélène's hemisomnambulism into complete trances, I believe myself, however, altogether innocent of the origin, and therefore of the subsequent development, of the great subliminal creations of which I have spoken. The first, that of Leopold, is of very early date, even going back probably, as we shall see, prior to Mlle. Smith's initiation into spiritism. As to the three cycles, they did not, it is true, commence to display their full amplitude until after I had made Hélène's acquaintance; and since they start from the time when she first became subject to veritable trances, it would seem as though that supreme form of automatism is the only one capable of allowing the full expansion of productions so complex, and the only psychological container appropriate and adequate to such a content. But the first appearance of all three was clearly prior to my presence at the seances. The Hindoo dream, where I shall be found playing a rôle which I did not seek, evidently began (October 16, 1894) eight weeks before my admission to Mlle. Smith's seances. The Martian romance, which dates

p. 14

from the same period, is closely connected, as I shall also show, with an involuntary suggestion of M. Lemaître, who made the acquaintance of Hélène in the spring of 1894, nine months before my introduction to her. The Royal cycle, finally, had been roughly outlined at seances held at the home of M. Cuendet, in December, 1893. Nevertheless, I repeat, only since 1895 have the exuberant growth and magnificent flowering of that subliminal vegetation taken place under the stimulating and provocative influence, albeit wholly unintentional and altogether unsuspected at the time, of the varied environments of Mlle. Smith's seances.

As far as the indiscreet revelations in regard to my own family, which so much astonished me at my first meeting with Mlle. Smith, are concerned, as well as the innumerable extraordinary facts of the same kind with which her mediumship abounds, and to which she owes her immense reputation in spiritistic circles, it will suffice to return in the closing chapters of this book.

THE psychological history of Mlle. Smith and her automatisms is naturally divided into two separate periods by the important fact of her initiation into spiritism at the beginning of 1892. Before that time, not suspecting the possibility of voluntary communication with the world of disincarnate spirits, she naturally manifested nothing more than a few spontaneous phenomena, the first flutterings of her mediumistic faculties which still lay dormant, the exact nature and progress of which it would be interesting to know in detail; unfortunately, in the absence of written documents concerning that pre-spiritistic period, we are confined to the statements of Hélène and her parents in regard to it, and the untrustworthiness of the memory in connection with events of a remote past is only too well known.

The spiritistic period, on the contrary, extending over the last seven years, and infinitely more fertile in artificially promoted (e.g., the seances) as well as in spontaneous manifestations, is much better known to us; but in order to comprehend it intelligently, it is necessary first to pass in review the few facts

p. 16

which we have been able to gather relating to the pre-spiritistic period—that is to say, the childhood and youth of Mlle. Smith. That will be the subject of this chapter.

Mlle. Smith has lived in Geneva since her infancy. After attending school, she entered as an apprentice, at the age of fifteen, a large commercial house, where, as I have already stated, she still remains, and where, little by little, she has risen to a very responsible position. Her father, a merchant, was a Hungarian, and possessed a remarkable facility for languages, which is of interest to us in presence of the phenomena of glossolalia, a subject which will be discussed hereafter. Her mother is a Genevese. Both enjoyed excellent health and attained a venerable old age. Hélène had a younger sister who died in early childhood, and two brothers older than herself, who are now fathers of families and established abroad, where they have had successful business careers.

I am not aware that M. Smith, who was a man of positive character, ever displayed any phenomena of automatisms. Mme. Smith, however, as well as her grandmother, has experienced several thoroughly characteristic phenomena of that kind, and one, at least, of Hélène's brothers, it appears, could easily have become a good medium. This is another instance of the distinctly hereditary tendency of mediumistic faculties.

M. Smith, a man of active and enterprising character, died quite suddenly, probably of an embolism, at the age of seventy-five years. He had left Hungary

p. 17

in his youth, and finally established himself at Geneva, after having travelled extensively in Italy and Algiers, where he remained for several years. He spoke fluently Hungarian, German, French, Italian, and Spanish, understood English fairly well, and also knew Latin and a little Greek. It would seem that his daughter has inherited these linguistic aptitudes, but only in a latent and subliminal manner, for she has always detested the study of languages, and rebelled against learning German, in which she took lessons for three years.

Mme. Smith, who is a kind-hearted woman, with much good, practical sense, is sixty-seven years of age. Neither she nor her husband was ever a nervous or psychopathic subject, but both showed a marked tendency to broncho-pulmonary affections of a somewhat alarming type. Mme. Smith has, besides, suffered frequently from rheumatism. Hélène does not appear to have inherited these tendencies; she has always enjoyed robust health, and has not even had the slight diseases usually incidental to childhood.

Although both M. and Mme. Smith were Protestants, through a chain of peculiar circumstances their daughter was baptized a Catholic shortly after her birth, her name being inscribed some months later on the register of the Protestant church of Geneva. The memory of this unusual baptism has certainly not been lost by Hélène's subliminal imagination, and has duly contributed to the hypothesis of a mysterious origin. Of the years of childhood I know nothing specially interesting. At the intermediate

p. 18

school, at which she passed only a year, and where I have consulted the records of her class, she was not distinguished either for good or ill from the point of view of deportment, but she certainly did not reveal the full measure of her intelligence, since she failed to pass the examinations at the end of the year, a fact which decided her entrance upon an apprenticeship. On the other hand, the worthy pastor who gave her religious instruction somewhat later, and who has never lost sight of her since, has furnished me with most eulogistic testimonials as to her character; he remembers her as a young girl of serious disposition, intelligent, thoughtful, faithful in the discharge of her duties, and devoted to her family.

M. Smith never showed the least trace of mediumistic phenomena; from having been very indifferent, or even hostile, to spiritism until his daughter began to interest herself in it, he finally succumbed to her influence and became a believer in that doctrine towards the close of his life. Mme. Smith, on the contrary, has always been predisposed to it, and has experienced several phenomena of that nature in the course of her life. At the period of the epidemic of "table-tipping" which raged in our country about the middle of this century, she too experimented quite successfully for a while upon the table with her friends and acquaintances. Later, she had some sporadic visions. The following is one of the most typical. While her little daughter three years old was ill, Mme. Smith awoke in the middle of the night and saw an angel, of dazzling brightness, standing by the side of the

p. 19

little bed with its hands stretched out above the child; after some moments the apparition gradually dissolved. Mme. Smith awakened her husband and told him of the fatal significance which she attached to the vision, but he, unable to see anything, ridiculed her superstitious fears. As a matter of fact, the child died on the following day, to the great surprise of the physician attending her. This is a fine example of true maternal presentiment, subconsciously felt and transferring itself into the normal consciousness by a visual hallucination which borrowed for its symbolic content an appropriate popular image.

Mme. Smith never knew her mother, who died shortly after her birth; but she recalls and has related to me some characteristic visions of her grandmother, who brought her up; various phenomena connected with one of Hélène's brothers (hearing of steps in the night, etc.) have proved to her that one of her sons, at least, is a medium.

Hélène Smith was certainly predisposed, both by heredity and temperament, to become a medium, as soon as the outward opportunity—that is, the suggestions of spiritism—should present itself.

It is evident, indeed, from her recital of events, that she was more or less visionary from her infancy. It does not appear, however, that she ever manifested phenomena capable in themselves of attracting the attention of her family. I have not been able to discover any indication whatever of crises or attacks of an abnormal nature, not even of sleep-walking. Her automatisms have been always almost entirely con fined to the sensory or mental sphere, and it is only

p. 20

from her own narratives that other people have any knowledge of them. They assume the double form of reveries more or less conscious, and of hallucinations properly so called.

1. Reveries.—The habit of falling into reverie, of building castles in the air, of transporting one's self into other conditions of existence, or of telling one's self stories in which one plays the chief rôle, is more frequent among women than among men, and in childhood and youth than in mature years. This propensity seems to have always been extremely marked in the case of Mlle. Smith, since from her school-girl days she has shown herself to be of a sedentary and domestic temperament, preferring the quiet companionship of her mother to the games of her comrades, and her needle-work to out-door recreations. The fragments which have survived in Hélène's conscious memory are all that is known to us of the content of these reveries, but it suffices, nevertheless, to reveal to us the general tone of her fictions, and to show us that the images suddenly surging up before her mental vision had a peculiar, often very fantastic, character, and which enables us to see in them the beginnings of her later great somnambulistic romances. It is to be noticed also that the designs, embroideries, varied artistic works, which were always the favorite occupations of her moments of leisure and in which she excels, were almost always, from her infancy, not copies of exterior models, but the products of her own invention, marked with the bizarre and original stamp of her internal images. Moreover, these pieces of work grew under her fingers with an ease and

p. 21

rapidity that astonished herself. They made themselves, as it were.

She was always fond of indulging in day-dreams, and recalls many a half-hour passed motionless in an easy-chair, on which occasions she was accustomed to see all kinds of strange things, but, being of a very reticent nature, she seldom mentioned them to her parents for fear of not being understood. She used to see highly colored landscapes, a lion of stone with a mutilated head, fanciful objects on pedestals, etc. She does not remember the details, but does clearly recollect that they all bore a close resemblance to her Hindoo and Martian visions of later years.

These phantasmagoria also appeared to her in the night. She remembers, among other things, to have seen, when about fourteen or fifteen years old, a bright light thrown against the wall of her room, which then seemed to be filled with strange and unknown beings. She had the impression of being fully awake, but it suddenly occurred to her that she must have been dreaming, and it was only then that she comprehended that it was really a "vision" which she had experienced.

2. Hallucinations.—In the foregoing examples it would be difficult to say to exactly which category the psychologic facts belong, especially the nocturnal phenomena, and one may hesitate whether to regard them as simple dreams of a very vivid character, hypnagogic or hypnopompic * visions, or as veritable

p. 22

hallucinations. On the other hand, we undoubtedly have the right to give the latter designation to the numerous apparitions which Mlle. Smith has when in full possession of her senses in the daytime.

One day, for example, as she was playing out-of-doors with a friend, she saw some one following her, and mentioned the fact to her companion, who could not see any one. The imaginary individual, after having followed her around a tree for a moment, disappeared, and she was unable to find him again.

Of an entirely different order are the strange characters which she remembers having sometimes involuntarily substituted for French letters when writing to her friends, which must be regarded as graphomotor hallucinations. These were undoubtedly the same characters which at other times appeared to her in visual images.

This was the prelude to the phenomenon so frequently experienced by her in the last few years, and of which we shall hereafter see many examples—namely, automatic writing, mingling with her ordinary chirography in her waking state.

Alongside of hallucinations like these, which do not show any intentional or useful character and are only a capricious and fortuitous irruption into the normal consciousness, mere dreams or fancies filling up the sub-conscious strata, there are also manifested in Hélène's case some hallucinations of a manifest utility, which have in consequence the sense of messages

p. 23

addressed by the subliminal consciousness of the subject to her normal consciousness, by way of warning and protection. It is to be noted that these hallucinations, which might be called teleological, have lately been claimed by Leopold, although he has no recollection of, and does not assert himself to be the author of, the earlier ones.

The following is a curious example: At about the age of seventeen or eighteen, Hélène was returning from the country one evening, carrying a fine bouquet of flowers. During the last minutes of the journey she heard behind her a peculiar cry of a bird, which seemed to her to warn her against some danger, and she hastened her steps without looking behind. On her arrival at home the cry followed her into her room without her having been able to see the creature from which it emanated. She went tired to bed, and in the middle of the night awoke in great pain, but was unable to cry out. At that moment she felt herself gently lifted, together with the pillow on which she lay, as if by two friendly hands, which enabled her to recover her voice and call her mother, who hastened to comfort her, and carried the flowers, which were too odorous, out of the room. Leopold, on being interrogated recently during a somnambulism of Hélène as to this incident, coming up again after so many years, has a very clear recollection of it and gives the following explanation.

It was not really the cry of a bird, but it was he, Leopold, who caused Hélène to hear a sort of whistle, hoping thereby to attract her attention to the danger lurking in the bouquet of flowers, in which was

p. 24

a great deal of garden-mint of powerful odor. Unfortunately Hélène did not understand, and retained the bouquet in her room. He adds that his failure to give a more clear and intelligible warning was due to the fact that it was at that time impossible for him to do so. The whistle which Hélène took for the cry of a bird was all that it was in his power to utter. It was again he who intervened at the moment of her nocturnal illness by raising her head in order to enable her to call for help.

I have no reason to doubt the substantial accuracy either of the account given by Hélène and her mother, or of the explanation recently furnished by Leopold. The incident belongs to the category of well-known cases where a danger of some sort not suspected by the normal personality, but which is subconsciously known or recognized, is warded off by a preservative hallucination, either sensory (as here—the cry of the bird) or motor (as in the lifting of the body). The subliminal consciousness is not always able to give a clear message; in the present case, the auditive automatism remained in a state of elementary hallucination, a simple whistle, without being able to elevate it to a distinct verbal hallucination. Its general warning sense, however, was understood by Hélène, thanks to the confused feeling of danger that she felt at the same time. Moreover, this confused feeling, which caused her to quicken her steps, it seems to me, ought not to be considered as the consequence of the whistle she heard, but rather as a parallel phenomenon; the appearance or the odor of the mint she was carrying, while not attracting her conscious

p. 25

attention, nevertheless dimly roused in her an idea of the danger lurking in the flowers, and that idea in turn affected her clear consciousness under the double form of a vague emotion of danger and a verbo-auditive translation which did not go so far as to formulate itself explicitly.

Under circumstances of a nature calculated to cause a strong emotional shock, and especially when the psychic sphere which involves the sentiment of modesty is strongly acted upon, Hélène has a visual hallucination of a man clothed in a long, brown robe, with a white cross on his breast, like a monk, who comes to her aid, and accompanies her in silence as long as the necessity for his presence continues. This unknown protector, always silent, each time appearing and disappearing in a sudden and mysterious manner, is no other than Leopold himself, according to the recent affirmations of the latter.

We should naturally expect that Hélène would have had in her youth many striking experiences of prevision, marvellous intuition, divination, etc., which are among the most diffuse forms of teleological automatism. Such, however, does not seem to have been the fact; neither she nor her mother has recounted to me anything remarkable of this nature, and they confine themselves to a general affirmation of frequent presentiments, which were subsequently justified as to the persons and events with which they were connected.

All the examples which I have above cited concur in bringing to light the strong penchant of Mlle. Smith towards automatism. But from the point of

p. 26

view of their meaning there is a notable difference between the teleological phenomena, presentiments or hallucinations of a manifest utility, and those which have none—mere reveries and other perturbations, which are altogether superfluous, if not actually detrimental, to Hélène's normal personality.

There are dreams and other automatisms absolutely useless which have insinuated themselves without rhyme or reason into Hélène's normal life. One does not know how or in what manner to interpret these phenomena, capricious and fortuitous as they seem to be, and they remain isolated, inconsiderable facts, without bearing and without interest, since they cannot be attached to any central principle, to one mother-idea or fundamental emotion.

We are, therefore, reduced to certain conjectures, the most reasonable of which is that these diverse fragments make part of some vast subconscious creation, in which all the being of Mlle. Smith, crushed and bruised by the conditions which the realities of life have imposed upon her, as is more or less the case with each one of us, gave free wing to the deep aspirations of its nature and expanded into the fiction of an existence more brilliant than her own. All that we know of Hélène's character, both as a child and as a young girl, shows us that her dominant emotional note was a sort of instinctive inward revolt against the modest environment in which it was her lot to be born, a profound feeling of dread and opposition, of inexplicable malaise, of bitter antagonism against the whole of her material and intellectual environment. While showing herself always very devoted to her parents

p. 27

and brothers, she had only feeble natural affinities for them. She felt like a stranger in her family and as one away from home. She had a feeling of isolation, of abandonment, of exile, which created a sort of gulf between her and her family. So strong were these feelings that she actually one day seriously asked her parents if it was absolutely certain that she was their daughter, or whether it was not possible that the nurse might some day by mistake have brought home another child from the daily walk.

This want of adaptation to her environment, this sort of mysterious homesickness for an unknown country, shows itself in a characteristic manner in the following fragment of narrative, in which Hélène, who has always attributed great importance to dreams, tells of one in which an isolated house figured. "To me this retired mansion, in which I lived alone, isolated, represents my life, which from my infancy has been neither happy nor gay. Even while very young I do not remember to have shared any of the tastes or any of the ideas of the members of my family. Thus during the whole of my childhood I was left in what I call a profound isolation of heart And in spite of all, in spite of this complete want of sympathy, I could not make up my mind to marry, although I had several opportunities. A voice was always saying, 'Do not hurry: the time has not arrived; this is not the destiny for which you are reserved.' And I have listened to that voice, which has absolutely nothing to do with conscience, and I do not regret it, for since I have engaged in spiritism I have found myself so surrounded with sympathy

p. 28

and friendships that I have somewhat forgotten my sad lot."

This quotation speaks volumes in regard to the turn of mind and the emotional disposition which ruled Hélène as a little girl. It is surely, so to speak, the vulgar story and the common lot of all; many a child, many a youth, many an unrecognized genius, feel themselves suffocating in their too narrow environment when the latent energies of life begin to ferment. But there are differences in kind and in degree. With Mlle. Hélène Smith the sentiment of not having been made for her environment, and of belonging by nature to a higher sphere, was intense and lasting. Her mother always had the impression that Hélène was not happy, and wondered that she was so serious, so absorbed, so wanting in the exuberance of spirits natural to her age. Her father and her brothers, not comprehending the real reasons for this absence of gayety, taxed her very unjustly with pride and hauteur, and accused her sometimes of despising her humble surroundings. There are shades of feeling which can only be understood when they have been experienced. Hélène well knew that she really had no contempt for her material and social environment, which, on the contrary, inspired her with respect, but which simply was not congenial to her nature and temperament.

To this fundamental feeling of imprisonment in a too paltry sphere was joined, in Hélène's case, a timid disposition. Darkness, the least noise, the creaking of the furniture, made her tremble; by day, a person walking behind her, an unexpected movement,

p. 29

the ringing of the door-bell, gave her the impression that some one wishing to harm her had come to seize her and carry her off. On the whole, Hélène's tendency to be startled by everything and nothing constituted with her a grievous panophobia, a state of fear and insecurity which greatly strengthened her impression of want of union—of mésalliance—with an environment to which she was decidedly superior.

It is easy now to see the connection between that depressing emotionalism which was the attribute of Hélène's childhood and the slightly megalomaniac tone of her later subliminal romances. The idea intrudes itself that, in spite of—or by reason of—their apparent contrast, these two traits are not independent of each other, but bound by the tie of cause and effect. But this causal connection is in great danger of being interpreted in a precisely inverse sense by the empirical psychologist and the metaphysical occultist. The latter will explain Mlle. Smith's curious impression of strangeness and superiority to the base conditions of her actual existence, by her illustrious previous incarnations; the psychologist, on the contrary, will see in that sane impression the wholly natural origin of her grandiose somnambulistic personifications. In default of a complete understanding, always dubious, between these so different points of view, of which we shall speak later, it will be advisable to adopt at least a provisional modus vivendi, based on the party-wall of the native constitution or individual character of Mlle. Smith. On the farther side of that wall, in eternity,

p. 30

so to speak, a parte ante which precedes the arrival of Hélène into this life, the occultist will have full latitude to imagine such a succession of existences as it shall please him in order to explain the character she has had from her infancy. But on this side of the wall—that is to say, within the limits of her present life—the psychologist will have the right to ignore all these prenatal metempsychoses, and taking for his point of departure the innate constitution of Hélène, without troubling himself about anything she may have received by the accidents of heredity or preserved from her royal pre-existences, he will endeavor to explain by that same constitution, as it reveals itself in her daily life, the genesis of her subliminal creations under the action of occasional exterior influences. The occultist, then, can have the pleasure of regarding Mlle. Smith's characteristic trait as a child, that impression of solitude and wandering about in a world for which she was not made, as the effect of her real past greatnesses, while the psychologist will be permitted to see in it the cause of her future dreams of grandeur.

The emotional disposition which I have depicted, and which is one of the forms under which the mal-adaptation of the organism, physical and mental, to the hard conditions of the environment, betrays itself, seems therefore to me to have been the source and starting-point for all the dreamings of Hélène in her childhood. Thence came these visions, always warm, luminous, highly colored, exotic, bizarre; and these brilliant apparitions, superbly dressed, in which her antipathy for her insipid and

p. 31

unpleasant surroundings betrays itself, her weariness of ordinary, commonplace people, her disgust for prosaic occupations, for vulgar and disagreeable things, for the narrow house, the dirty streets, the cold winters, and the gray sky. Whether these images, very diverse, but of the same brilliant quality, were already existent in Hélène's subconscious thought while still a child or a young girl, we are unable to say. It is, however, probable that their systematization was far from attaining to such a degree of perfection as they have presented during the past few years under the influence of spiritism.

All the facts of automatism to which Hélène can assign a vaguely approximate date group themselves around her fifteenth year, and are all included between the limits of her ninth and twentieth years.

This evident connection with a phase of development of major importance has been confirmed to me by Leopold on various occasions, who says that he appeared to Hélène for the first time in her tenth year, on an exceptional occasion of extreme fright, but after that, not until about four years later, because the "physiological conditions" necessary to his apparition were not yet realized. The moment they were realized, he says, he began to manifest himself, and it is at the same period, according to him, that Hélène commenced to recover memories of her Hindoo existence, under the form of strange visions of which she comprehended neither the nature nor the origin.

After the age of about twenty years, without affirming or believing that her visions and apparitions

p. 32

ceased altogether, Mlle. Smith has no striking recollections of any, and she has not told me of any psychic phenomenon experienced by her in the series of years immediately preceding her entrance into spiritism. We may infer from this, with some reason, that the ebullitions of the imaginative subconscious life gradually became calm after the explosion of the period we have mentioned. They had been appeased. The conflict between Hélène's inner nature and the environment in which she was forced to live became less fierce. A certain equilibrium was established between the necessities of practical life and her inward aspirations. On the one hand, she resigned herself to the necessities of reality; and if her native pride could not yield to the point of condescending to a marriage, honorable undoubtedly, but for which she felt she was not intended, we must nevertheless pay homage to the perseverance, the fidelity, the devotion which she always brought to the fulfilment of her family and business duties. On the other hand, she did not permit the flame of the ideal to be extinguished in her, and it reacted upon her environment as strongly as possible, making its imprint upon her personality well marked.

She introduced a certain stamp of elegance into the modest home of her parents. She arranged for herself a small salon, coquettish and comfortable in its simplicity. She took lessons in music, and bought herself a piano. She hung some old engravings on her walls, secured some Japanese vases, a jardinière filled with plants, cut flowers in pretty vases, a hanging lamp with a beautiful shade of her

p. 33

own make, a table-cover which she had put together and embroidered herself, some photographs curiously framed according to her own design; and out of this harmonious whole, always beautifully kept, she evolved something original, bizarre, and delightful, conforming well to the general character of her fantastic subconsciousness.

At the same time that Mlle. Smith succeeded in accommodating herself to the conditions of her existence, the state of latent timidity in which she lived gradually diminished. She is still occasionally overcome by fear, but much less frequently than formerly, and never without a legitimate exterior cause.

Indeed, judging her by these latter years, I do not recognize in her the child or young girl of former days, always timid, trembling, and frightened, taciturn and morose, who has been depicted to me by herself and her mother.

It seems to me, then, that the wildness of the dreams and automatisms, which were symptoms of a tendency to mental disintegration, which marked the years of puberty, was succeeded by a progressive diminution of these troubles and a gradual gaining of wisdom on the part of the subliminal strata. We may presume that this harmonization, this reciprocal adaptation of the internal to the external, would in time have perfected itself, and that the whole personality of Mlle. Smith would have continued to consolidate and unify itself, if spiritism had not come all of a sudden to rekindle the fire which still slumbered under the ashes and to give a new start to the

p. 34

subliminal mechanism which was beginning to grow rusty.

The suppressed fictions aroused themselves, the reveries of former years resumed their sway, and the images of subliminal phantasy began to be more prolific than ever under the fertile suggestions of occult philosophy, rallying-points or centres of crystallization—such as the idea of former existences and reincarnations—around which they had only to group and organize themselves in order to give birth to the vast somnambulistic constructions the development of which we shall be obliged to follow.

HAVING endeavored in the preceding chapter to reconstruct in its chief characteristics the history of Mlle. Smith up to the time when spiritism begins to be mixed up with it, I would have preferred in the present chapter to make a detailed study of her psychological life during these last years, without however, as yet, touching upon the content, properly so called, of her automatisms. Not having been able to accomplish this design to my satisfaction, for want of time and patience, I shall endeavor at least to systematize my notes somewhat by grouping them under four heads. I shall trace the birth of Hélène's mediumship as far as it is possible for me to do so from the meagre accounts I have been able to procure concerning a time at which I was not acquainted with her. Then, passing to facts with which I am more familiar, I will describe rapidly her normal state as I have been able to see it for the last five years. This would have been the place for a study of individual psychology, but I have been compelled to abandon the idea on account of multiple difficulties. Finally, I will offer a few remarks on

p. 36

the abnormal side of her existence, which it is convenient to divide into two groups, namely, the spontaneous—that is to say, springing up of themselves in the course of her ordinary life; or those provoked by the voluntary seeking for favorable circumstances, and which constitute the seances properly so called.

I. THE MEDIUMISTIC BEGINNINGS OF MLLE. SMITH
In the winter of 1891-92 Mlle. Smith heard spiritism spoken of by one of her acquaintances, Mme. Y., who lent her Denis's book, Après la Mort. The perusal of this work having vividly excited Hélène's curiosity, Mme. Y. agreed to accompany her to her friend, Mlle. Z., who was interested in the same questions, and who produced automatic writing. They then decided to form a circle for regular experimentation. I take from the notes which Mlle. Z. has had the kindness to furnish me, the account, unfortunately very brief, of the seances at which Hélène's mediumistic faculties first made their appearance.

"It was on the 10th of February, 1892, that I made the acquaintance of Mlle. Smith. She was introduced to me by Mme. Y., for the purpose of endeavoring to form a spiritistic group. She was then altogether a novice in spiritism, never having attempted anything, and did not suspect the faculties that have since developed themselves in her.

"February 20.—First reunion: We seat ourselves at the table; we succeed in making it oscillate. We regard Mme. Y. as the medium upon whom we can

p. 37

reckon. We try for writing. We receive through me encouragements to proceed.

"February 26.—Progress; the table moves itself considerably, salutes one by one all the members of the group, and gives us certain names, of which only one is recognized . . . Writing: Mlle. Smith, who tries for the first time, writes mechanically, her eyes closed, some phrases, of which we can decipher some words.

"March 11.—Nothing at this seance, except a communication written by myself.

"March 18.—Progress; clear communication by the table. Attempt to experiment in the darkness (which was not absolute, the hall outside having some incandescent lights which diffused a feeble light; we could distinguish each other with difficulty). Mlle. Smith sees a balloon, now luminous, now becoming dark: she has seen nothing up to this time. Writing: Mlle. Smith writes mechanically a quite long communication from the father of M. K. [a Bulgarian student present at the seance]; advice to him."

At this point the sitters became so numerous that they broke up into two groups, of which the one continuing to meet with Mlle. Z. does not concern us. Mlle. Smith became a member of the other, which met at the house of a lady named N., where weekly seances were held for a year and a half (up to the end of June, 1893). The records of these meetings, kept by Mme. N., are unfortunately very brief and obscure on many points of interest to the psychologist. Those of the first months are in the handwriting of Mlle. Smith, who acted as secretary of the group for

p. 38

thirty seances. As she only took down at the time the headings of the communications of the spirits and wrote out the remainder on the following day, we cannot rely very strongly on the objective accuracy of these accounts, which, however, have the advantage of presenting to us the mediumship of Hélène, as related by herself. She speaks of herself in the third person.

The following is a summary of the two first seances held in this new environment:

"March 25, 1892.—Eleven persons around a large and heavy dining-table of oak with two leaves. The table is set in motion, and several spirits come and give their names (by raps), and testify to the pleasure it gives them to find themselves among us. It is at this seance that Mlle. Smith begins to distinguish vague gleams with long white streamers moving from the floor to the ceiling, and then a magnificent star, which in the darkness appears to her alone throughout the whole of the seance. We augur from this that she will end by seeing things more distinctly and will possess the gift of clairvoyance.

"April 1.—Violent movements of the table, due to a spirit who calls himself David and announces himself as the spiritual guide of the group. Then he gives way to another spirit who says he is Victor Hugo, and the guide and protector of Mlle. Smith, who is very much surprised to be assisted by a person of such importance. He soon disappears. Mlle. Smith is very much agitated; she has fits of shivering, is very cold. She is very restless, and sees suddenly, balancing itself above the table, a grinning,

p. 39

very ill-favored face, with long red hair. She is so frightened that she demands that the lights be lit. She is calmed and reassured. The figure disappears. Afterwards she sees a magnificent bouquet of roses of different hues being placed on the table before one of the sitters, M. P. All at once she sees a small snake come out from underneath the bouquet, which, crawling quickly, perceives the flowers, looks at them, tries to reach the hand of M. P., withdraws for an instant, comes back slowly, and disappears in the interior of the bouquet. Then all is dissolved and three raps are given on the table, terminating the seance. [M. P. interprets the meaning of the vision of the bouquet and the serpent as a symbolic translation of an emotional impression experienced by Mlle. Smith]."

Such was the birth of Hélène's mediumship. Scarcely anything happened on the 10th of February, when the movements of the table were not attributed to her (although in all probability she caused them); in the following seances she appeared in two attempts at automatic writing (unfortunately lost) in imitation of the writing medium with whom she was sitting. The outcome of this second attempt leads us to suppose that Hélène's faculties would have developed rapidly in that direction if she had not abandoned it and changed her environment.

Her visual faculty, suggested by the experiments at obscure seances, shows itself on the 18th and 25th of March in the form of elementary hallucinations or vague figures having their point of departure probably in the simple entoptical phenomena, the

p. 40

retina's own light, consecutive images, etc. Then, encouraged by the predictions of the sitters, she attained on the 1st of April to visions properly so called, having a varied content and a real or symbolic signification. At the same time her typtological automatism was perfecting itself. We recognize it in the name of Victor Hugo, coming especially for Mlle. Smith, and suspect it to have been a name already given at the second seance.

Auditive hallucinations follow closely upon the visual, but it is impossible to know at just what date, as the records do not clearly indicate whether the messages recorded had that origin or were rapped out on the table. To these known forms of automatism must be added the frequent phenomena of emotion, shiverings, sadness, restlessness, fear, etc., which are experienced by Hélène without knowing why, and are afterwards found to be in perfect conformity to, and in evident connection with, the content of those emotional phenomena which they generally precede by a few moments.

Thus, in a half-dozen weekly seances, the mediumship of Mlle. Smith was invested with a complex psychological aspect, which from that time it preserved intact for three years, and of which I was a witness after I made her acquaintance. This rapidity of development is not at all unusual; but there is this peculiarity about Hélène, that her mediumistic faculties, after their first appearance, remained for a long time stationary, and then underwent all at once, in the spring of 1895, the enormous

p. 41

transformation and tremendous expansion which I have described in the first chapter, and to which I will not again refer.

II. MLLE. SMITH IN HER NORMAL STATE
I was about to say that in her normal state Mlle. Smith is normal. Certain scruples restrain me, and I correct myself by saying that in her ordinary state she seems just like anybody else. By this I mean that outside of the gaps which the seances and the spontaneous eruptions of automatism make in her life, no one would suspect, observing her performance of her various duties, or in talking with her on all sorts of subjects, all that she is capable of in her abnormal states, or the curious treasures which are concealed in her subliminal strata.

With a healthy and ruddy complexion, of good height, well proportioned, of regular and harmonious features, she breathes health in everything. She presents no visible stigmata of degeneration. As to psychic defects or anomalies, with the exception of her mediumship itself, I know of none, the timidity of her youth having entirely disappeared. Her physical strength is marvellous, as shown by the fact that she bears up under the strain of a business which demands nearly eleven hours of her time each day, nearly all of which she is compelled to stand on her feet, and from which she takes only one week's vacation in summer. Besides this confining work away from home, she assists her mother about the house morning and evening, in the housekeeping duties,

p. 42

and finds time besides to read a little, to practise at her piano, and to make the lovely handiwork, which she designs and executes herself with remarkable originality and good taste. To a life so full must be added, besides, the spiritistic seances which she is generally willing to give on Sunday, and sometimes on a weekday evening, very disinterestedly, to persons who are interested in psychic questions or who desire to consult Leopold on important subjects.

While hesitating to affirm that a person presenting phenomena so extraordinary as those of mediumship is perfectly normal in other respects, I am pleased to discover that as far as Mlle. Smith is concerned, through my conversations with her and as the result of my investigations concerning her, she does not present a single abnormality, physical, intellectual, or moral, between the periods of the irruptions of her automatisms. Her field of vision, which she has permitted me to measure with a Landolt perimeter, is normal for white as well as for colors, for which latter she has a very delicate perception. There is no trace of tactile anæsthesia in her hands. There is no known motor trouble. The tremor of the index-finger gives a line, of four oscillations per second on an average, differing not at all from the lines obtained from persons perfectly normal (see Fig. 2).

It cannot be expected that I should paint a full moral and intellectual portrait of Mlle. Smith, as I should be in danger of hurting her feelings in case my attempt should come to her notice. I can only touch on a few points. One of the most striking is her great

p. 43

native dignity; her bearing, her manners, her language are always perfect, and have a certain quality of noblesse and pride which accords well with her somnambulistic rôles. On occasion she shows a stately and regal hauteur. She is very impressionable, and feels little things very keenly. Her antipathies as well as her sympathies are quick, lively, and tenacious. She is energetic and persevering. She knows very well what she wants, and nothing passes her by unperceived, nor does she forget anything in the conduct of others towards her. "I see everything, nothing escapes me, and I forgive but never forget," she has often said to me. Perhaps a severe moralist would find in her a certain exaggeration of personal sensibility, but that sort of self-love is a very common characteristic of human nature, and is very natural in mediums who are continually exposed to public criticism.

She is very intelligent and highly gifted. In conversation she shows herself vivacious, sprightly, and sometimes sarcastic. Psychic problems, and all questions connected with mediumistic phenomena, of which she is herself so striking an example, occupy her mind a great deal and form the principal subject of her private thoughts and of her conversations with people in whom she is interested.

Her philosophical views are not wanting in originality or breadth. She does not believe in spiritism, in the generally accepted sense of the term, and has never consented, in spite of the advances which have been made to her, to become a member of the Geneva Society (spiritistic) for Psychic Studies, because, as

p. 44

she says, she has no fixed ideas on subjects so obscure, does not care for theories, and "does not work in the interest of any party." She investigates, she observes, she reflects and discusses, having adopted for her motto, "The truth in all things, for all things, and always."

There are two points in regard to which she is uncompromising—namely, the objective reality of Leopold, and the supernormal content of her automatisms. No one dares tell her that her great invisible protector is only an illusory apparition, another part of herself, a product of her subconscious imagination; nor that the strange peculiarities of her mediumistic communications—the Sanscrit, the recognizable signatures of deceased persons, the thousand correct revelations of facts unknown to her—are but old forgotten memories of things which she saw or heard in her childhood. Such suppositions being contrary to her inmost beliefs, and seemingly false in fact, easily irritate her, as being in defiance of good sense and an outrage on truth. But outside of these two subjects she will examine and discuss coolly any hypothesis one chooses. The idea that she should be the reincarnation of a Hindoo princess or of Marie Antoinette, that Leopold is really Cagliostro, that the visions called Martian are really from the planet Mars, etc., all seem to her to conform fully to the facts; but these beliefs are not indispensable to her, and she is ready, should they prove to be false, to change to other theories—as, for example, telepathy, a mixture of occult influences, a mysterious meeting in her of intuitions coming from some higher sphere, etc.

p. 45

Undoubtedly the supposition of her pre-existences in India and on the throne of France seems to her to explain in a plausible manner the feeling, which has followed her from childhood, of belonging to a world higher than that in which the chance of birth has imprisoned her for this life; but she does not affirm a positive belief in that brilliant past, is not wholly convinced of it, and remains in a sensible state of expectancy of the true explanation of these ultimate mysteries of her life.

There is another subject, also, which is close to her heart. She has heard it said that in the eyes of scientists and physicians mediums are considered to be fools, hysterical subjects, or insane, or, in any event, abnormal, in the bad sense of the word. But, in the light of the experience of every day of her life, she protests vigorously against this odious insinuation. She declares emphatically that she is "perfectly sane in body and mind, not in the least unbalanced," and repels with indignation the idea there can be any serious abnormality or the least danger in mediumship such as she practises. "I am far from being abnormal," she wrote me recently, "and I have never been so clear of vision, so lucid, and so apt to judge correctly as since I have begun to develop as a medium."

Leopold, too, speaking through her voice during her trances, has more than once solemnly testified as to her perfect health. He has also returned to the subject by letter; we shall find farther on a very interesting certificate of mental equilibrium dictated by him and written by him with her hand, as if to

p. 46

give more weight to his declarations (see Fig. 8, p. 137.)

It is incontestable that Hélène has a very well-organized brain, as is evidenced by the admirable manner in which she manages the important and complicated department which is under her direction in the commercial establishment in which she is employed. To accuse her of being insane, simply because she is a medium, as some charitable souls (the world is full of them) do not hesitate to do sometimes, is, to say the least, a most inadmissible petitio principii.

The opinion which Mlle. Smith holds in her normal state concerning her automatic faculties is altogether optimistic; and there is nothing to prove her in the wrong. She regards her mediumship as a rare and precious privilege, with which nothing in the world would induce her to part. True, she also sees in it the reason for the malevolent and unjust judgments, the jealousies, the base suspicions, to which the ignorant multitude have in all ages subjected those who have succeeded in elevating themselves above it through the possession of faculties of this kind. But, on the whole, the disadvantages are more than counterbalanced by gains of a high order, and the inward satisfaction attached to such a gift. And here I desire to emphasize the statement, once for all, that Hélène does not belong to the class of professional mediums, nor to those who use their mediumship for the purpose of coining money. Mlle. Smith, who earns her living in the position which her intelligence and fitness have secured for her, and through which her family enjoys a modest ease,

p. 47

never accepts any pecuniary compensation for her seances or consultations. Such a traffic in faculties which have a sort of religious signification in her eyes would be absolutely repugnant to her feelings.

Hélène's spontaneous automatisms have often aided her in, without ever having interfered with, her daily occupations. There is, happily for her, a great difference in intensity between the phenomena of her seances and those which break in upon her habitual existence, the latter never having caused such disturbance of her personality as the former.

In her daily life she has only passing hallucinations limited to one or two of the senses, superficial hemisomnambulisms, compatible with a certain amount of self-possession—in short, ephemeral perturbations of no importance from a practical point of view. Taken as a whole, the interventions of the subliminal in her ordinary existence are more beneficial to her than otherwise, since they often bear the stamp of utility and appropriateness, which make them very serviceable.

Phenomena of hypermnesia, divination, lost objects mysteriously recovered, happy inspirations, true presentiments, correct intuitions—in a word, teleological automatisms of every sort—she possesses in so high a degree that this small coin of genius is more than sufficient to compensate for the inconveniences resulting from the distraction and momentary absence of mind with which the vision is accompanied.

In the seances, on the contrary, she presents the most grave functional alterations that one can imagine, and passes through accesses of lethargy,

p. 48

catalepsy, somnambulism, total change of personality, etc., the least of which would be a very disagreeable adventure for her if it should happen to occur in the street or at her office.

But here I am obliged to leave Hélène's ordinary state to enter upon the study of her automatisms.

III. SPONTANEOUS AUTOMATIC PHENOMENA
The automatisms which occur outside the seances in Mlle. Smith's every-day life, those, at least, which she is able to recall and narrate, are of a frequency very variable and utterly independent of any known circumstances; sometimes presenting themselves two or three times in the same day; at others, two or three weeks will elapse without a single one. Extremely diverse in their form and content, these phenomena may be divided into three categories, based upon their origin. The first proceed from impressions received by Hélène in moments of special suggestibility; the second are the fortuitous apparitions above the ordinary level of her consciousness, the romances in process of elaboration to which we are coming; the last, which differ from the two preceding species (which are always useless, if not detrimental) by their beneficial character and their adaptation to the needs of the moment, are roused by those teleological automatisms to which I have already called attention as having occurred in her childhood, and which have shared in the general recrudescence of her subconscious life under the lash of the spiritistic experiences.

p. 49

Let us pass these different cases rapidly in review.

I. Permanence of exterior suggestions.—The spiritistic reunions are naturally their principal source. I do not mean that she has there been subjected to experiments in post-hypnotic suggestion. Justice to all those who have attended the seances compels the statement that they have never abused the suggestibility which she shows on such occasions, by suggesting ideas of such a nature as to cause her annoyance on the following days. The most that has been attempted has been the suggestion of some small matters by way of harmless experiment, to be executed by her a few moments after awaking from her trance. There is no need of intentional suggestions to influence her in a lasting manner; therefore we have avoided as far as possible everything that might leave disagreeable traces behind, and have suggested to her before the end of the seance that she have on the morrow no headache, fatigue, etc.; but it sometimes happens that certain incidents, often absolutely insignificant, are engraved on her memory in a most unlooked-for manner and assail her as inexplicable obsessions during the ensuing week. The following are some specimens of involuntary suggestion, which generally linger for three or four days, but may occasionally continue for twelve or fifteen.

Hélène told me one Sunday that she had been possessed several times during the day by the hallucinatory image of a straw hat, the inside of which was turned towards her, and-which remained vertically in the air about three or four feet in front of

p. 50

her, without being held by any one. She had the feeling that this hat belonged to me, and I happened finally to recollect that at the seance of the preceding Sunday I happened to fan myself with this very hat during her final trance, the image of which had been engraved on her mind in one of the flashes in which she opened her eyes and closed them again instantly before her final awaking. This obsession, said she, was very strong on Monday and the following day or two, but lessened somewhat towards the end of the week.

At another time she preserved during a whole week the sensation of the pressure of my thumb on her left eyebrow. (Compression of the external frontal and suborbital nerves is a means I often employ to hasten her awaking, after a hint given by Leopold.)

There happened to her also twice in the same day an auditive and visual hallucination of an aged person whom she did not recognize, but the extremely characteristic description of whom corresponds so well with that of a gentleman of Geneva who had been mentioned to her a few days previously, immediately before the commencement of a seance (when she was probably already in her state of suggestibility), that there is scarcely any doubt but that these apparitions were the consequence of that conversation.

'Following another seance where she had, at the beginning of a Hindoo scene, made vain efforts to detach a bracelet from her left wrist, she preserved for three days the feeling of something grasping that wrist, without understanding what it could be.

In the same way, various feelings of sadness, anger,

p. 51

a desire to laugh or to weep, etc., the cause of which she was unable to explain, have often followed her for a considerable length of time after the seances of which these feelings were the manifest emotional echo. This is often the effect of our dreams on our waking state: we forget the dreams, but their influence remains, and is often more marked in the dreams of a hypnotized person or a somnambulist than in those of ordinary sleep.

The seances are not the exclusive source of the involuntary suggestions which trouble Mlle. Smith in her daily life without any benefit to herself. It is evident that on every occasion when she finds herself in that particular condition of least resistance which we, in our ignorance of its intrinsic nature, designate by the convenient name of " suggestibility," she is exposed to impressions capable of returning to assail her in the course of her daily occupations. Fortunately this condition of suggestibility does not seem to develop itself readily in her outside of the spiritistic reunions.

2. Irruptions of subliminal reveries.—I shall have too many occasions to cite concrete examples of visions, voices, and other spontaneous outpourings of the work of imagination, which are continually going on under the ordinary consciousness of Mlle. Smith, to dwell long on this point. Some general remarks will suffice.

The connection which the unforeseen phenomena maintain with those of the seances themselves is very varied. Sometimes we are able to recognize them as reproductions, more or less incomplete, of episodes

p. 52

which occurred at the preceding seances, and consider them simple echoes or post-hypnotic repetitions of these last. Sometimes, on the contrary, it appears that we have to deal with preparatory rehearsals of scenes which will unfold themselves at length and will be continued at some later seance. Finally, sometimes it is a question of tableaux, having no connection with those which fill up the seances; they are like leaves, flying away never to return, romances which are continually being fabricated in the deep subliminal strata of Mlle. Smith's consciousness.

Hélène, in fact, does not long remember, nor in much detail, with a few exceptions, those visions which take place in her ordinary state, and which occur most frequently early in the morning, while she is still in bed, or just after she has arisen and while working by the light of her lamp; sometimes in the evening, or during the brief moments of rest in the middle of the day, and, much more rarely, while in the full activity of waking hours she is at her desk. If she had not long since, at my request, and with great good will, acquired the habit of noting in pencil the essential content of these apparitions, either during the apparition itself (which she is not always able to do) or else immediately afterwards, we should have still more deficiencies in the plot of her romances to deplore. Hélène's psychological state, during her spontaneous visions, is known to me only by her own descriptions. She is fortunately a very intelligent observer and a good psychologist.

Her narratives show that her visions are accompanied by a certain degree of obnubilation. For a

p. 53

few moments, for instance, the room, the light of the lamp, disappear from before her eyes; the noise of the wheels in the street ceases to be heard; she feels herself becoming inert and passive, while a feeling of bliss and ecstatic well-being permeates her entire individuality in the presence of the spectacle which appears to her; then the vision, to her great regret, slowly fades from her view, the lamp and the furniture reappear, the outside noises again make themselves heard, and she is astonished that the idea did not occur to her to put down in pencil the strange words she has heard, or that she did not touch or caress, for example, the beautiful birds of many-colored plumage flying and singing around her. Sometimes she has maintained sufficient presence of mind to scribble from dictation the words striking her ear; but the wretched handwriting proves that her attention, all absorbed by the apparition, could not follow the pencil, and that the hand directed it badly. At other times the reverse is the fact. It appears in the course of the vision as though some one took hold of her arm and guided it in spite of herself; the result is splendid calligraphies, wholly different from her own handwriting, executed without her knowledge, and during the execution of which her mind was wholly absent, if we can judge from the surprise she shows on awaking when she finds before her these strange writings, and from analogous scenes which transpire at the seances.

The preceding is applicable especially to the more frequent cases—that is, to the morning or evening visions which happen to her at home, in that intermediate

p. 54

condition between sleep and waking, always so favorable, as we know, to the development of unconscious cerebration. But there are innumerable shades and gradations between this middle type, so to speak, and its opposite extremes; on the one hand is the fortunately very exceptional case where she is seized with ecstasy while at her place of business; and, on the other hand, that in which the automatism limits itself to inscribing some unknown characters or words in another hand than her own in her correspondence and writings—peculiar lapsus calami, which she is not slow to perceive on coming to herself.

The following is an example of a case of ecstasy:

Having ascended one day to an upper story, to look for something in a dark store-room, she had an apparition of a man in a turban and large white cloak, whom she had the impression of recognizing, * and whose presence filled her with a delightful calm and profound happiness. She could not recall the conversation which passed between them, which, though in an unknown language, she nevertheless had the feeling of having perfectly comprehended. On the departure of the mysterious visitor she was astonished to find herself brought back to sombre reality, and stupefied on noting by her watch that the interview had lasted much longer than it had seemed to do. She preserved all that day a delicious feeling of wellbeing as the effect of the strange apparition.

p. 55

The phenomenon of mingling strange writing with her own is of relatively frequent occurrence, and we shall see divers specimens of it in the following chapters, apropos of the romances to which it especially belongs. I will give here only one complex example, which will serve at the same time as an illustration of a special kind of automatism, very harmless, to which Hélène is also subject, and which consists in making verses, not without knowing, but at least without intending to do so, and in connection with the most trifling matters.

There are times when, in spite of herself, she feels compelled to speak in distinct rhymes of eight feet, which she does not prepare, and does not perceive until the moment she has finished uttering them. * In this particular case it is by a quatrain (a very unusual occurrence) that she replies to some one who had consulted her in regard to some blue

p. 56

ribbon. But this quatrain, by its style, by the vision of the blond head of a child which accompanies it, and by the manner also in which she writes it, causes us to hazard the conjecture that it is an inspiration depending on the underlying Royal cycle; while in the following letter, in which she narrates the affair to M. Lemaître, her pen inscribes, all unknown to her, strange characters evidently due to the cropping out of the Martian cycle, of which she speaks in the letter (see Fig. 1, a passage of that letter making a Martian M and V in the words vers and rimait):

 Fig. 1. Fragment of a letter (normal handwriting) of Mlle. Smith, containing two Martian letters. (Collection of M. Lemaître.)
Click to enlarge
Fig. 1. Fragment of a letter (normal handwriting) of Mlle. Smith, containing two Martian letters. (Collection of M. Lemaître.)

"I have heard some Martian words this afternoon, but have not been able to retain them in my mind. I send you those heard a few days ago, when I had the vision of which I am about to make you the design (Martian lamp). Yesterday morning I for the first time spoke in verse, without being aware of it; it was only on finishing the sentence that I perceived that it rhymed, and I reconstructed it to assure myself of the fact. A little later, on examining some ribbons, I began anew to speak in verse, and I send those also:

p. 57

they will amuse you. It is a curious thing that I had at that same moment the vision of the blond curly head of a child bound with a blue ribbon. The vision lasted more than a minute. What is still more curious, I do not at all recollect having worn ribbons of that shade as a child: I remember some rose-colored, some red, but I have no recollection whatever of any blue ribbons. I really do not know why I spoke these words; it is the more amusing. I was obliged to speak them, I assure you, in spite of myself. I was eager to put them on paper, and I noticed in writing them down that, for a moment, the handwriting was not regular, that is, it was slightly different from mine."

Here is the quatrain, the pencil impression of which is too faint to enable a fac-simile to be reproduced here, and in it I have indicated by italics the words and syllables the calligraphy or orthography of which differs from that of Hélène and becomes the style of automatic handwriting called that of Marie Antoinette:

"Les nuances de ces rubans
 Me rappelent mes jeunes ans;
 Ce bleu verdi, je m’en souvien,
 Sans mes cheveux alloit si bien!"
The head of curly blond hair, ornamented with blue ribbons, also figures in the visions of the Royal cycle, and appears to belong, as is here the case, sometimes to Marie Antoinette herself, sometimes to one or other of her children, especially the Dauphin.

While it is generally easy to connect these eruptions of the subliminal volcano with the various dreams

p. 58

from which they emanate, such is not always the case, and there are visions the origin of which is doubtful and ambiguous. We must not forget that, alongside of the grand cycles of Hélène which are better known, there also float in her latent imagination innumerable small accessory systems, more or less independent, which supply a large part of the seances, such as revelations of former events connected with the families of the sitters, etc.; it is not always possible to identify the fragments coining from these isolated dreams.

3. Teleological automatisms.—The spontaneous phenomena of this category, possessing as a common characteristic a practical utility for Hélène more or less marked, can be subdivided into two classes, according to their direct attachment to the personality of Leopold, or their not belonging to any distinct personality, and which only express in a vivid manner the result of the normal working, although more or less unconscious, of the faculties of memory and of reason. I confine myself now to citing one case of each of these classes, of which we shall see other examples in the chapters relating to Leopold and to supernormal appearances.

One day Mlle. Smith, wishing to take down a large and heavy object from a high shelf, was prevented from so doing by the fact that her uplifted arms seemed as though petrified and incapable of being moved for some seconds; she saw in this a warning and gave up her intention. In a later seance Leopold said that it was he himself who had caused Hélène's arms to become rigid, in order to prevent her from

p. 59

attempting to lift the object which was too heavy for her and would have caused some accident to befall her.

On another occasion a clerk who sought vainly for a certain pattern asked Hélène if she knew what had become of it. Hélène replied mechanically and without reflection, "Yes, it was sent to Mr. J." (a customer of the firm); at the same time there appeared before her in large black figures about eight or ten inches in height the number 18, and she added, instinctively, "It was eighteen days ago." This statement caused the clerk to smile, because of its improbability, the rule of the house being that customers to whom patterns were lent for examination must return them inside of three days or a messenger would be sent for them. Hélène, struck by this objection, and having no conscious recollection of the affair, replied, "Really, perhaps I am wrong." Meanwhile, an investigation of the date indicated in the records of the house showed that she was perfectly correct. It was through various negligences, with which she had nothing at all to do, that the pattern had not been sent for or recovered. Leopold, on being asked, has no recollection of this circumstance, and does not appear to have been the author of this automatism of cryptomnesia, nor of many other analogous phenomena through which Hélène's subconscious memory renders her signal services and has gained for her a well-merited and highly valued reputation.

Thus we see that if the spontaneous automatisms of Mlle. Smith are often the vexatious result of her moments of suggestibility, or the tempestuous irruption

p. 60

of her subliminal reveries, they also often assume the form of useful messages. Such compensation is not to be despised.

IV. THE SEANCES
Mlle. Smith has never been hypnotized. In her instinctive aversion, which she shares with the majority of mediums, to anything that seems like an attempt to experiment upon her, she has always refused to allow herself to be put to sleep. She does not realize that in avoiding the idea she has actually accepted the reality, since her spiritistic experiences in reality constitute for her an auto-hypnotization, which inevitably degenerates into a hetero-hypnotization, as she is brought under the influence of one or other of the persons present at the seance.

All her seances have somewhat of the same psychologic form, the same method of development running through their immense diversity of content. She places herself at the table with the idea and the intention of bringing into play her mediumistic faculties. After an interval, varying from a few seconds to a quarter of an hour, generally in a shorter time if the room is well darkened and the sitters are perfectly silent, she begins to have visions, preceded and accompanied by very varied sensory and motor disturbances, after which she passes into a complete trance. In that state, it rarely happens, and then only for a few moments, that she is entirely unconscious of the persons present, and, as it were, shut up within her personal dream and plunged into profound

p. 61

lethargy (hypnotic syncope) . Ordinarily she remains in communication, more or less close, with one of the sitters, who thus finds himself in the same relation towards her as a hypnotizer towards his subject, and able to take advantage of that rapport, by giving her any immediate or future suggestions that he may desire. When the seance consists only of waking visions, it lasts generally only a short time—an hour to an hour and a half—and is ended quickly by three sharp raps upon the table, after which Mlle. Smith returns to her normal state, which she scarcely seems to have left. If the somnambulism has been complete, the seance is prolonged to double that length of time, and often longer, and the return to the normal state comes slowly through phases of deep sleep, alternating with relapses into somnambulistic gestures and attitudes, moments of catalepsy, etc. The final awakening is always preceded by several brief awakenings, followed by relapses into sleep.

Each of these preliminary awakenings, as well as the final one, is accompanied by the same characteristic movements of the features. The eyes, which have been for a long time closed, open wide, stupidly staring into vacancy, or fix themselves slowly on the objects and the sitters within their range of vision, the dilated pupils do not react, the face is an impassive and rigid mask, devoid of expression. Hélène seems altogether absent. All at once, with a slight heaving of the breast and raising of the head, and a quick breath, a gleam of intelligence illumines her countenance, the mouth is gracefully

p. 62

opened, the eyes become brilliant, the entire countenance lights up with a pleasant smile and gives evidence of her recognition of the world and of her return to herself. But with the same suddenness with which it appeared, that appearance of life lasts but a second or two, the physiognomy resumes its lifeless mask, the eyes becoming haggard and fixed close again, and the head falls on the back of the chair. This return of sleep will be followed by another sudden awaking, then perhaps by several more, until the final awaking, always distinguished, after the smile at the beginning, by the stereotyped question, "What time is it?" and by a movement of surprise on learning that it is so late. There is no memory of what has transpired during the seance.

A complete description of the psychological and physiological phenomena which present themselves, or which might be obtained in the course of the seances, would detain me too long, since there is absolutely nothing constant either in the nature or in the succession of the phenomena, and no two seances are evolved exactly in the same manner. I must confine myself to some striking characteristics.

Three principal symptoms, almost contemporaneous generally, announce that Mlle. Smith is beginning to enter into her trance.

There are on the one side emotional or cœnæsthetic modifications, the cause of which is revealed a little later in the subsequent messages. Hélène is, for instance, seized by an invincible desire to laugh, which she cannot or will not explain; or she complains

p. 63

of sadness, fear, of different unpleasant sensations, of heat or of cold, of nausea, etc., according to the nature of the communications which are approaching and of which these emotional states are the forerunners.

There are, on the other hand, phenomena of systematic anæsthesia (negative hallucinations), limited to those sitters whom the coming messages concern. Hélène ceases to see them, while continuing to hear their voices and feel their touch; or, on the contrary, she is astonished to no longer hear them, though she sees their lips moving, etc.; or, finally, she does not perceive them in any manner, and demands to know why they are leaving when the seance is hardly begun. In its details this systematic anæsthesia varies infinitely, and extends sometimes to but one part of the person concerned, to his hand, to a portion of his face, etc., without it always being possible to explain these capricious details by the content of the following visions; it would seem that the incoherence of the dream presides over this preliminary work of disintegration, and that the normal perceptions are absorbed by the subconscious personality eager for material for the building up of the hallucinations which it is preparing.

Systematic anæsthesia is often complicated with positive hallucinations, and Hélène will manifest her surprise at seeing, for example, a strange costume or an unusual coiffure. This, in reality, is the vision which is already being installed.

The third symptom, which does not manifest itself clearly in her, but the presence of which can be often

p. 64

established before all the others by investigation, is a complete allochiria, * ordinarily accompanied by various other sensory and motor disturbances. If, at the beginning of the seance, Hélène is asked, for example, to raise her right hand, to move the left index-finger, or to close one eye, she begins straightway to carry into effect these different acts; then all at once, without knowing why and without hesitation, she deceives herself in regard to the side, and raises her left hand, moves her right index-finger, closes the other eye, etc. This indicates that she is no longer in her normal state, though still appearing to retain her ordinary consciousness, and with the liveliness of a normal person discusses the question of her having mistaken her right hand or eye for her left, and vice versa. It is to be noted that Leopold, on such occasions of pronounced allochiria, does not share this error in regard to the side. I have assisted at some curious discussions between him and Hélène, she insisting that such a hand was her right, or that the Isle Rousseau is on the left as one passes the bridge of Mont Blanc or coming from the railway station, and Leopold all the while, by means of raps upon the table, giving her clearly to understand she was wrong. †

A little after the allochiria, and sometimes simultaneously with it, are to be found various other phenomena, extremely variable, of which I here cite only

p. 65

a few One of her arms is contractured as it rests upon the table, and resists the efforts of the sitters to lift it up, as though it were a bar of iron; the fingers of the hand also participate in this rigidity. Sometimes this contracture does not exist before, but establishes itself at the same instant that some one touches the forearm, and increases in proportion to the efforts which are made to overcome it. There is no regularity in the distribution of the anæsthesia (changing from one instant to another), the contractures, or convulsions which the hands and arms of Hélène exhibit. It all seems due to pure caprice, or to depend only on underlying dreams, of which little is known.

Certain analogous and likewise capricious phenomena of anæsthesia, paralysis, sensations of all sorts, of which Hélène complains, often appear in her face, her eyes, her mouth, etc. In the midst of all these disturbances the visions announce themselves, and the somnambulism is introduced with modifications, equally variable, of other functions, evidenced by tears, sobbings, sighs, repeated hiccoughs, various changing of the rhythm of respiration, etc.

If Hélène is experimented upon and questioned too long, the development of the original visions is obstructed, and she easily reaches a degree of sensibility where she falls into the standard class of public representations of hypnotism—a charmed and fascinated state in which she remains riveted before some brilliant object, as, for example, the ring, trinkets, or cuff-button of one of the sitters; then

p. 66

precipitates herself in a frenzy upon the object, and tries to secure it; or assumes emotional attitudes and poses under the influence of joyous airs upon the piano; experiences suggested hallucinations of all kinds, sees terrible serpents, which she pursues with a pair of pincers; beautiful flowers, which she smells with deep respirations and distributes to the sitters; or, again, bleeding wounds which have been made on her hand, and which cause her to shed tears. The common-place character of these phenomena causes their long continuance to be deprecated, and the ingenuity of all is exercised in endeavoring by different means, none of which is very efficacious or very rapid, to plunge her into profound and tranquil sleep, from which she is not long in passing of her own accord into complete somnambulism and in taking up the thread of her personal imaginations.

If all these disturbing investigations have been successfully avoided, the spontaneous development of the automatisms is effected with greater rapidity and fulness. It is possible then to behold, in the same seance, a very varied spectacle, and to listen, besides, to certain special communications made in a semi-waking state to one or other of the sitters; then, in complete somnambulism, a Hindoo vision is presented, followed by a Martian dream, with an incarnation of Leopold in the middle, and a scene of Marie Antoinette to wind up with. Ordinarily two of these last creations will suffice to fill up a seance. One such representation is not performed without the loss of considerable strength by the medium, which shows itself by the final sleep being prolonged sometimes

p. 67

for an hour, interrupted, as I have said, by repetitions of the preceding somnambulistic scenes, easily recognizable by certain gestures or the murmuring of characteristic words. Passing through these diverse oscillations and the ephemeral awaking, of which I have spoken above, Hélène finishes by returning to her normal state; but the seances which have been too long continued or too full of movement leave her very much fatigued for the rest of the day. It has also sometimes happened to her to re-enter the somnambulism (from which she had probably not completely emerged) during the course of the evening or on returning home, and only to succeed in recovering her perfectly normal state through the assistance of a night's sleep.

As to the real nature of Hélène's slumbers at the end of the seances, and her states of consciousness when she awakes, it is difficult for me to pronounce, having only been able to observe them under unfavorable conditions—that is, in the presence of sitters more or less numerous and restless. The greater part certainly consist of somnambulisms, in which she hears all that passes around her, since although she seems profoundly asleep and absent, the suggestions then given her to be carried out after awaking are registered and performed wonderfully—at least when Leopold, who is almost always on hand and answers by movements of one finger or another to questions put to him, does not make any opposition or declare that the suggestion shall not be carried out I There are also brief moments when Hélène seems to be in a profound state of coma and kind of syncope

p. 68

without trace of psychic life; her pulse and respiration continue to be regular, but she does not react to any excitation, her arms, if raised, fall heavily, no sign of Leopold can be obtained, and suggestions made at that instant will not be acted upon.

These lethargic phases, during which all consciousness seems to be abolished, are generally followed by cataleptic phases in which the hands and arms preserve every position in which they may be placed, and continue the movements of rotation or of oscillation which may be forced upon them, but never for more than one or two minutes.

In default of more complete experiments, I submit the following comparison of Hélène's muscular force and of her sensibility to pain before and after a seance lasting nearly three hours, the second half being in full somnambulism. At 4.50 o'clock, on sitting down at the table three dynamometric tests with her right hand gave kilos. 27.5, 27, 25—average, 26.5. The sensibility to pain measured on the back of the median phalanx of the index-finger with the algesiometer of Griesbach, gave for the right, grs. 35, 40, 20, 20—average, 29; for the left, 35, 20, 20, 15—average, 22.5 grs. (Sensibility slightly more delicate than that of another lady present at the seance, not a medium and in perfect health.)

At 7.45 o'clock, some minutes after the final awaking: dynamometer, right hand, 8, 4.5, 4.5—average, 5.7; algesiometer, complete analgesia both as to right and left, on the whole of the back of the index as well as the rest of the hand and wrist, the maximum of the instrument (100 grs.) was attained

p. 69

and passed without arousing any painful sensation but only an impression of contact.

One hour later, after dinner: dynamometer 22, 22, 19—average, 21; algesiometer, 20, 18 for the right: 15, 20 for the left. It is possible, then, to say that her muscular force and sensibility to pain, both normal immediately before her entrance upon the seance, are still abolished in the first fifteen minutes after awaking, but are found to be restored in about an hour. Perception of colors, on the contrary, appeared to be as perfect immediately after awaking as before the seance. The tremor of the index-finger; normal before the seance, is very much exaggerated in its amplitude for a certain time after awaking and reflects sometimes the respiratory movements, as can be seen by the curves of Fig. 2. This denotes a great diminution of kinesthetic sensibility and of voluntary control over the immobility of the hand.

The state in which Mlle. Smith carries out the post-hypnotic suggestions made to her in the course of her somnambulisms, when they do not come into collision with either the pronounced opposition of Leopold or the states of lethargy of which I have spoken, is interesting on account of its varied character, which seems to depend upon the greater or less ease with which the hallucination or the act suggested can be reconciled with Hélène's normal personality. Their execution in the full waking state seems to be confined to suggestions of simple acts, free from absurdity, the idea of which would be easily accepted and carried out by the normal self when the desired moment arrived. If, on the contrary, it is a

p. 70

question of more complicated and difficult things, compatible, however, with the rational points of view of the normal waking state, Hélène falls momentarily into somnambulism for the execution of the order given, unless she has permanently remained in that state, in spite of her apparent awaking, in order not
to re-enter definitely and completely upon her ordinary state until after the execution of the order, of which there then remains to her no recollection whatever.

From the foregoing facts we may conclude that little or nothing of that which goes on around her escapes her subconscious intelligence, and it is from this source that her somnambulistic romances are nourished afresh.

A word more as to the preparation for the seances. I do not refer to a conscious preparation, but to a subliminal incubation or elaboration, unknown by her, showing itself on the level of her ordinary personality in the form of fugitive gleams and fragmentary images during her sleep at night or the moments of awaking in the morning. Mlle. Smith, in reality, has no hold, possesses no influence, upon the nature of her visions and somnambulisms. She is able, undoubtedly, up to a certain point, to aid their appearance in a general way, by cultivating tranquillity of mind, securing darkness and silence in the room, and by abandoning herself to a passive attitude of mind; or to hinder it, on the other hand, by movement, or distraction of attention; but with the fixed and concrete content itself of her automatisms she has nothing to do and no share in the responsibility for it. So far as her great cycles or her detached messages are concerned, they are fabricated in her in spite of herself, and without her having a word to say about their production, any more than one has in the formation of his dreams. When it is recollected, on the other hand, that the phenomena of incubation, of subliminal preparation,

p. 72

or unconscious cerebration, are universal facts, playing their rôle in the psychology of every human being, we can rely upon finding them also among the mediums, and upon their holding a place with them much more important than with others, owing to the fact that their subconscious life is so much more fully developed.

With each one of us the expectation or the simple perspective of any event—a departure, a visit, an errand, or undertaking to do anything, a letter to write, in short, all the more insignificant incidents of daily existence, when they are not absolutely unforeseen—promote a psychological adaptation more or less extended and profound.

Alongside of and underneath the conscious expectancy, certain physical or mental attitudes, voluntarily assumed in view of the event, always effect an underlying preparation of an inward kind, a change which we may regard, according to the side from which we consider the individual, as a peculiar psychical orientation or cerebral adjustment, a modification in the association of ideas or in the dynamics of the cortical nerves. But everything points to the fact that in persons gifted with mediumship this underlying preparation is capable of assuming on occasion a greater importance than is the case with ordinary mortals, a much more complete independence of the ordinary consciousness

To return to Mlle. Smith, when she knows some time in advance who will be present at her next seance, and what people she will almost surely meet there, it would be altogether natural that such previous

p. 73

knowledge of the environment and of the sitters would influence her subliminal thoughts and in some degree direct the course of the latent incubation. It may well be asked, therefore, whether the varied spectacle which the seances furnish is really always impromptu and has its birth on the spur of the moment like ordinary dreams, or whether it has been subconsciously thought out, the seance being only the performance of an arrested programme, the representation coram populo of scenes already ripened in the deep subliminal strata of the medium.

Neither of these two hypotheses, held to exclude the other, answers to the facts, but there is some truth in both of them.

The menu of the seances—if the expression is permissible—is always composed of one or two plats de résistance, carefully prepared in advance in the subliminal laboratories, and of various hors d’oeuvres left to the inspiration of the moment. To speak more exactly, the general plot, the chief lines and more striking points of the scenes which unfold themselves are fixed according to a previous arrangement, but the details of execution and accessory embellishments are entirely dependent upon chance circumstances. The proof of this is found, on the one hand, in the suppleness, the perfect ease, the appropriateness with which Hélène's automatisms—if we can still apply the word automatism to those cases in which spontaneity, self-possession, free use of all the faculties constitute the dominant characteristics—often adapt themselves to unexpected situations in the environment or capricious interruptions on

p. 74

the part of the sitters; on the other hand, in the fact that Leopold, interrogated at the beginning of the seance, ordinarily knows very well and announces the principal vision or incarnations which are about to make their appearance, provided, at least, the spectators do not hinder their unfolding by their tempestuous clamor for something else.

The animated conversations, sometimes full of spirited repartee, between Leopold or Marie Antoinette and the sitters, could not have been prepared in advance, and are altogether opposed to the stereotyped repetition which is generally expected of automatic phenomena. But, on the other hand, such repetition, almost entirely mechanical and devoid of sense, presents itself on frequent occasions. I have, for instance, seen somnambulistic scenes presented which were entirely misplaced, and constituted at the time veritable anachronisms, which would have perfectly fitted the situation eight days previously in another environment, and for which the aforesaid scenes had been evidently intended; but, having been withheld until the last moment by unforeseen circumstances, the following seance gets the benefit of these postponed messages.

Here is proof that Hélène's subliminal imagination prepares up to a certain point her principal productions, in view of the conditions and surroundings under which the seance will probably take place, and also that these products, once elaborated, must be eliminated and poured forth with a sort of blind necessity, at the right or the wrong time, whenever the entrance of Hélène into a favorable hypnoid state furnishes

p. 75

them an opportunity so to do. It follows also that her normal personality has nothing whatever to do with the preparation of the seances, since she can neither suppress nor change scenes badly adapted to the actual environment, the appearance of which sometimes greatly annoys Mlle. Smith when they are recounted to her after the seance; nor can she provoke the messages, the production of which she desires and vainly hopes for—as, for example, a medical consultation with Leopold, the incarnation of a deceased parent, or a scene from one cycle rather than from the others, for the benefit of a sitter who particularly desires it, and whom she is very desirous to please.

Much more could be said concerning the psychological side of the seances of Mlle. Smith, but I must limit myself. It will be possible to gain a more complete idea of this subject by studying the illustrations in the following chapters on the chief cycles of her brilliant subliminal fantasy.

IS Leopold really Joseph Balsamo, as he pretends? Or, since he has nothing in common with the famous thaumaturgist of the last century, save a certain superficial resemblance, is he, at any rate, a real being, separate from, and independent of, Mlle. Smith? Or, finally, is he only a pseudo-reality, a kind of allotropic modification of Hélène herself, a product of her subliminal imagination, just like our dream creations and the rôles suggested to a hypnotic subject?

Of these three suppositions it is the last which to my mind is undoubtedly the true one, while in Mlle. Smith's eyes it is as certainly the false view. It would be hard to imagine a more profound difference of opinion than that which exists between Mlle. Smith and myself on this subject. It is I, always, who get the worst of a discussion with her concerning it. I yield for two reasons. First, out of politeness; and, secondly, because I understand Hélène perfectly, and, putting myself in her place, realize that I should think exactly as she does about the matter.

Given her surroundings and personal experiences, it is impossible for her to do otherwise than believe

p. 77

in the objective distinct existence of that mysterious being who constantly enters into her life in a sensible and quasi-material way, leaving her no room to doubt. He presents himself before her endowed with corporeality like that of other people, and hides objects which are behind him exactly as an ordinary individual of flesh and bone would do He talks into her ears, generally into the left, in a characteristic voice, which appears to come from a variable distance, sometimes about six feet off, sometimes much farther. He jars the table on which she has placed her immobile arms, takes hold of her wrist and writes with her hand, holding the pen in a manner unlike her, and with a handwriting wholly different from hers. He puts her to sleep without her knowledge, and she is astonished to learn upon awaking that he has gesticulated with her arms and spoken through her mouth in the deep bass voice of a man, with an Italian accent, which has nothing in common with the clear and beautiful quality of her feminine voice.

Moreover, he is not always on hand. He by no means answers Hélène's appeals on all occasions; is not at her mercy; far from it. His conduct, his manifestations, his comings and goings cannot be predicted with any certainty, and testify to an autonomous being, endowed with free-will, often otherwise occupied or absent on his own affairs, which do not permit of his holding himself constantly at the disposal of Mlle. Smith. Sometimes he remains for weeks without revealing himself, in spite of her wishing for him and calling upon him. Then, all at once, he makes his appearance when she least expects him. He

p. 78

speaks for her in a way she would have no idea of doing, he dictates to her poems of which she would be incapable. He replies to her oral or mental questions, converses with her, and discusses various questions. Like a wise friend, a rational mentor, and as one seeing things from a higher plane, he gives her advice, counsel, orders even sometimes directly opposite to her wishes and against which she rebels. He consoles her, exhorts her, soothes, encourages, and reprimands her; he undertakes against her the defence of persons she does not like, and pleads the cause of those who are antipathetic to her. In a word, it would be impossible to imagine a being more independent or more different from Mlle. Smith herself, having a more personal character, an individuality more marked, or a more certain actual existence.

Hélène is also fortified in this conviction by the belief not only of members of her own family, but by that of other cultivated people who, having attended many of her seances, have no doubt whatever of Leopold's objective and separate existence. There are those who believe so firmly in the reality of this superior being, invisible to them, that they are in the habit of calling upon him during the absence of Mlle. Smith. Naturally they obtain responses, through the table or otherwise, and that causes unforeseen complications sometimes when she comes to learn of it. For while she admits theoretically—and Leopold himself has often declared the same thing—that he extends his surveillance and protection from afar over other spiritistic groups, and especially over all Hélène's friends and acquaintances, in practice and in fact,

p. 79

however, it happens that neither he nor she will willingly admit the authenticity of those pretended communications from Leopold obtained in the absence of the medium of his predilection. It is generally some deceiving spirit who has manifested in his place on these occasions. These denials, however, do not prevent those who have become believers from continuing to believe in the omnipresence of this good genius, or from teaching their children to revere him, to make vows and address prayers to him. It must not be forgotten that spiritism is a religion. This also explains the great respect shown to mediums, which is like that accorded to priests.

It follows that, without in the least refraining from speaking ill of them whenever they think they have a grievance against them, on the other hand they bestow on them the same marks of respect as are only accorded to the most sublime product of the human race.

I have known a salon where, on the centre table, in full view and in the place of honor, were two photographs in beautiful frames: on the one side the head of Christ, on the other the portrait of—Mlle. Hélène Smith. Among other believers, with less ideal but more practical aspirations, no business matter of importance is closed, no serious decision made, until Leopold has been consulted through Hélène as an intermediary, and the cases are too numerous to mention in which he has furnished important information, prevented a heavy precuniary loss, given an efficacious medical prescription, etc.

It is easily seen how all the successes obtained by

p. 80

[paragraph continues] Leopold, and the mystical veneration which many very estimable persons accord him, must contribute to strengthen the faith of Hélène in her all-powerful protector. It is in vain that, against this absolute assurance, one seeks to avail one's self of the arguments of contemporary psychology. The example of the fictions of the dream, the analogies taken from hypnotism and from psychopathology, considerations of mental disintegration, the division of the consciousness and the formation of second personalities, all these refined subtleties of our modern scientists break in pieces like glass against immovable rock. I shall not undertake to combat a proposition which, for her, has incontestably so much evidence in its favor, and which resolves all difficulties in the most felicitous manner and in conformity to good common-sense.

Nevertheless, since each individual has a right to his own opinion in the world, I beg leave to assume, for the time being, that Leopold does not exist outside of Mlle. Smith, and to try to discover his possible genesis in the mental life of the latter—solely by hypothesis and by means of psychological experiment. Therefore, readers who have little taste for this kind of academic composition had better skip this chapter.

I. PSYCHOGENESIS OF LEOPOLD
A description of the development of Leopold is not easy, since he has a double origin, apparent and real, like the cranial nerves which give so much trouble to the students of anatomy.

p. 81

His apparent origin, or, I should say, the moment when he is outwardly separated from the personality of Hélène, and manifests as an independent "spirit," is relatively clear and well marked; but his actual origin, profoundly enfolded in the most inward strata of Hélène's personality and inextricably mixed up with them, presents great obscurities and can only be determined in a very conjectural manner. Let us begin with the apparent origin, or the first appearance of Leopold at the seances.

It is easy to understand that, once initiated into spiritism and plunged into a current of ideas where the comforting doctrine of spirit-guides and protectors holds an important place, Mlle. Smith did not delay in coming into possession of, like all good mediums, a disincarnate spirit specially attached to her person. She even had two in succession, Victor Hugo and Cagliostro. It is not a question of a simple change of name of the guide of Hélène, who presented himself first under the aspect and the name of the great poet and then afterwards adopted that of the renowned thaumaturgist, but there were, at least at the beginning, two different personalities, apparently hostile to each other, one of whom by degrees supplanted the other, after a struggle, a trace of which is found in the very incomplete reports of the seances of that period. Three phases can also be distinguished in the psychogenesis of Mlle. Smith's guide: an initial phase of five months, during which Victor Hugo reigns alone; a phase of transition of about a year, when the protection of Victor Hugo is seen to be powerless to protect Hélène

p. 82

and her spiritistic group against the invasion of an intruder called Leopold, who claims and manifests an increasing authority over the medium by virtue of mysterious relations in the course of a previous existence; finally, the present period, which has lasted for six years past, in which Victor Hugo no longer figures, and which may be dated approximately from the moment when it was revealed that Leopold is only an assumed name, under which he hides in reality the great personality of Joseph Balsamo.

I do not find any fact worthy of mention in the first phase, in which Victor Hugo, who seems to have appeared as the guide of Mlle. Smith about the 1st of April, 1892 (see above, p. 38), played a rôle of no importance. In the second phase, however, it is necessary to cite some extracts from the reports of the seances of the N. group, in order to throw light upon the singular character which Leopold manifested there from the beginning.

August 26, 1892.—"A spirit announces himself under the name of Leopold. He comes for Mlle. Smith, and seems to wish to have a great authority over her. She sees him for some moments, he appears to be about thirty-five years of age, and is clothed altogether in black. The expression of his countenance is rather pleasing, and through answers to some questions which we put to him we are given to understand that he knew her in another existence, and that he does not wish her to give her heart to any one here below. . . Mlle. Smith recognizes her guide, Victor Hugo. She is made

p. 83

happy by his arrival, and asks his protection against the obsession of this new spirit. He answers that she has nothing to fear, that he will always be present. She is joyful at being guarded and protected by him, and feels that she has nothing to fear."

September 2.—. . . "Leopold comes also, but Mlle. Smith fears nothing, since her guide (Victor Hugo) is there to protect her."

September 23.—. . . "An unpleasant evening. A spirit announces himself. It is Leopold. He speaks to us at once: 'I am here. I wish to be master of this sitting.' We are very much disappointed, and do not expect any good of him. He tries, as he had already done once before, to put Mlle. Smith to sleep, who has great difficulty in struggling against this sleep. She rises from the table, hoping by this means to rid herself of him, and that he will give up his place to others. She returns in about ten minutes, but he is still there, and apparently has no intention of abandoning his place. We summon our friends (spiritual) to our aid. . . . They take Leopold's place momentarily, but very soon Leopold returns; we struggle with him, we desire him to go away, but neither soft nor hard words have any effect; before that dogged determination we realize that all our efforts will be useless, and we decide to close the seance."

October 3.—"[Manifestation by the favorite spirits of the group, who declare] that they have not been able to come, as they would have liked to do; that they were prevented by the spirit of Leopold,

p. 84

who is trying to introduce himself to us; that we should repulse him as much as possible, persuaded that he does not come for any good end. I do not know whether we shall be able to rid ourselves of him, but we greatly fear that he will injure us and retard our advancement."

October 7.—. . . "Leopold announces himself. We try to reason with him; we do not wish to forbid his coming, but we ask of him that he shall come as a friend to all, and not in the rôle of master. He is not satisfied; appears to bear much malice. We trust he will come to have better feelings. He shows himself, walks around the table, bows to us, and salutes each one with his hand, and retires again, leaving his place to others."

October 14.—"[After a quarter of an hour of motionless and silent waiting in darkness around the table Mlle. Smith is questioned, and she is shaken in vain.] She is asleep. By the advice of persons present we allow her to remain asleep, when, at the end of five minutes, the table raises itself, a spirit announces himself. It is Victor Hugo; we ask if he has anything to say; he answers yes, and spells out: Wake her; do not allow her ever to sleep. We try to do so. We are nervous about that sleep; we have great difficulty in awakening her."

January 6, 1893.—"After twenty minutes of waiting, Leopold arrives, and, as is his habit, puts the medium to sleep for some minutes; he torments us, and prevents our friends (disincarnate) from coming to the table. He vexes us in every way, and goes contrary to all our wishes. In presence of that rancor

p. 85

the sitters regret the indications of ill-humor they have shown towards him, and deplore having to pay so dear for them. It is with difficulty that the medium can be awakened."

February, 1893.—"In one of the seances of this month a remarkable thing happened: the spirit of Leopold, who was very much irritated on that day, twice in succession took away her chair from our medium and carried it to the farther end of the room, while Mlle. Smith fell heavily to the floor. Not expecting this wretched farce, Mlle. Smith struck her knee so hard that for several days she suffered pain in walking. We were obliged to terminate the seance; we were not comfortable. Why this animosity?"

This word animosity describes very well the conduct and the feelings that Leopold seemed to have towards the N. group and against his placid rival, Victor Hugo. The personal recollections of the sitters whom I have been able to interrogate confirm the substantial physiognomy of the two figures. That of Hugo is, in effect, effaced and altogether eclipsed by the totally opposite character of the arrogant Leopold, who takes a peculiar pleasure in the rôle of vindictive and jealous mischief-maker, obstructing the appearance of the "spirits" desired by the group, putting the medium to sleep, or causing her to fall on the floor, forbidding her to give her heart to another, and breaking up the seances as far as he is able. It seems to have finally resulted in the meetings of the N. group coming to an end at the beginning of the summer; then comes a break of six months, after which I find

p. 86

[paragraph continues] Mlle. Smith on the 12th of December inaugurating a new series of seances, with an entirely different spiritistic group organized by Prof. Cuendet. Here Victor Hugo very rarely appears, and never in the rôle of guide, which rôle is freely accorded, without objection, to Leopold, whose real identity (Cagliostro) was no secret to any one in the new environment. It was, therefore, in the course of the year 1893, at a period which cannot be precisely determined from the records, that the rivalry of these two personalities was terminated by the complete triumph of the second.

It follows from the preceding recital that the appearance of Leopold in seances of the N. group was a phenomenon of manifest contrast, of hostility, and of antagonism towards that group.

It is a difficult and delicate task to pronounce upon the complex spirit of an environment of which one was not a part, and in regard to which one possesses only a few and not very concordant incidents. The following, however, seem to be the facts:

The N. group, much more numerous than is convenient in seances of that kind, was composed of very varied elements. Alongside of serious believers were ordinarily some students who boarded with one of the ladies of the group, and who do not appear to have felt the seriousness of spiritistic reunions.

That age has no mercy, and the profound signification of the seances often escaped their superficial and frivolous intelligence. Under such conditions Mlle. Smith was inevitably compelled to experience two contrary impressions. On the one hand, she perceived

p. 87

herself admired, made much of, fêted, as the unrivalled medium, which she really was, and upon whom the group depended for its existence; on the other hand, her secret instincts and high personal dignity could not but be offended by the familiarities to which she was exposed in this mixed environment.

I regard the two rival and successive guides of Hélène as the expression of this double sentiment. If she had been brought up like an American woman, or if her nature had been a degree less fine, the frivolity of the seances would undoubtedly have only given more warmth and brilliancy to Victor Hugo; instead of which, the victorious colors of Leopold are raised over a nature of great native pride, extremely sensitive on the point of feminine dignity, and whose severe and rigid education had already exalted her sense of self-respect. After a struggle of a year between these two personifications of opposite emotional tendencies, the second, as we have seen, finally triumphs; and Mlle. Smith withdraws from the N. group, which at the same time breaks up.

The idea I have formed of Leopold is now apparent. He represents, to my mind, in Mlle. Smith, the synthesis, the quintessence—and the expansion, too—of the most hidden springs of the psychological organism. He gushes forth from that deep and mysterious sphere into which the deepest roots of our individual existence are plunged, which bind us to the species itself, and perhaps to the Absolute, and whence confusedly spring our instincts of physical and moral self-preservation, our sexual feelings. When Hélène found herself in an environment not exactly dangerous,

p. 88

but where she simply ran the risk, as in the N. group, of yielding to some inclination contrary to her fundamental aspirations, it is then that Leopold suddenly springs up, speaking as the master, taking possession of the medium for himself, and indicating his unwillingness that she should attach herself to any one here below. We here recognize the same principle of self-protection and self-preservation which was already active in her as a young girl in the teleological automatisms arising on the occasion of certain emotional shocks, of which I have spoken on p. 25.

But, by these considerations, we have travelled very far from the original appearance of Leopold in the seance of the 26th of August, 1892, towards his actual, more ancient origin. This seems to date from a great fright which Hélène had in the course of her tenth year. As she was walking along the street, on her way home from school, she was attacked by a big dog. The terror of the poor child can well be imagined, and from which she was happily delivered by a personage clothed in a long brown robe with flowing sleeves and with a white cross on the breast, who, appearing to her suddenly and as by a miracle, chased the dog away, and disappeared before she had time to thank him. But, according to Leopold, this personage was no other than himself, who on this occasion for the first time appeared to Hélène, and saved her by driving away the dog.

This explanation was given by Leopold on the 6th of October, 1895, in a seance in which Hélène experienced, in a somnambulistic state, a repetition of

p. 89

that scene of fright, with heart-rending cries, gestures of struggle and defence, attempts at flight, etc. In the waking state she very well recalls this episode of her childhood, but cannot accept Leopold as the person who came to her rescue, but believes it to have been a priest or member of some religious order who rushed to her assistance and drove the animal away. Her parents also recollected the incident, which she told them one day on returning from school in a very excited state, and after which she could not for a long time encounter a dog in the street without hiding herself in the folds of her mother's dress. She has since always preserved an instinctive aversion towards dogs.

We have seen (p. 31) that after this first incident, matters remained in statu quo for four years, up to the time when the age of puberty began to favor the development of the Oriental visions. Here, Leopold, to whom we owe this information, does not altogether agree with himself, for at one time he says that it was he himself who furnished Mlle. Smith with her visions of India, at another time he says that they are reminiscences of one of her former existences.

Alongside of these varied visions, Leopold has clearly appeared under the form of the protector in the dark robe in a number of cases. I will only cite two examples, one very remote, the, other quite recent.

One day Hélène went to consult her family physician for some trifling ailment, who, having known her for a long time and being an old friend of her family, presumed to give her an innocent kiss. He was quite unprepared for the explosion of wrath

p. 90

which this familiarity provoked, and hastened to make his apologies: but what is of interest to us in this connection is the fact that under the shock of this emotion her defender of the brown robe appeared before her in the corner of the room, and did not leave her side until she had reached home.

A short time ago this same protector, always in the same costume, accompanied her several days in succession while she was traversing a little-frequented part of the route towards her place of business. One evening, also, he appeared to her at the entrance to the street leading to the locality in question, in the attitude of baring the way, and obliged her to make a detour to regain her house.

Mlle. Smith has the impression—and several indications go to show that she is not deceived—that it is with the purpose of sparing her some unpleasant sight or a dangerous encounter that Leopold, in the brown robe, appears to her under perfectly well-known conditions. He rises before her always at a distance of about ten yards, walks, or rather glides, along in silence, at the same rate as she advances towards him, attracting and fascinating her gaze in such a manner as to prevent her turning her eyes away from him either to the right or the left, until she has passed the place of danger. It is to be noted that whereas Leopold, under other circumstances—for instance, at the seances—shows himself to her in the most varied costumes and speaks on all subjects, it is always under his hieratic aspect, silent, and clothed in his long dark robe, that he appears to her on those occasions of real life in which she is exposed to feelings of fright peculiar

p. 91

to her sex, as he appeared to her on that first occasion in her tenth year.

The hints I have given sufficiently justify, I think, my opinion that the real and primordial origin of Leopold is to be found in that deep and delicate sphere in which we so often encounter the roots of hypnoid phenomena, and to which the most illustrious visionaries, such as Swedenborg, * seem to owe a great part not only of the intellectual content but. of the imaginative form, the hallucinatory wrapping, of their genius. There is a double problem to be solved in Mlle. Smith's case. Why have these instinctive feelings and emotional tendencies which are common to the entire human race succeeded in developing in her a product so complex and highly organized is is the personality of Leopold? and why, in the second place, does that personality believe itself to be Joseph Balsamo?

I instantly reply that these two results are, to my mind, entirely the effect of autosuggestion. To explain the first, the simple fact of her being occupied with spiritism and engaged in mediumistic experiments, is sufficient. Take any individual having in her subconsciousness memories, scruples, emotional tendencies, put into her head spiritistic leanings, then seat her at a table, or put a pencil in her hand: even though she may not be of a very impressionable or suggestible temperament, or inclined to the mental disintegration which the general

p. 92

public calls the mediumistic faculty, nevertheless, it will not be long before her subliminal elements group themselves and arrange themselves according to the "personal" form to which all consciousness tends, * and which discloses itself outwardly by communications which have the appearance of coming directly from disincarnate spirits.

In the case of Mlle. Smith, Leopold did not exist under the title of a distinct secondary personality before Hélène began to be occupied with spiritism. It was at the seances of the N. group, by an emotional reaction against certain influences, as we have seen, that he began, little by little, to take shape, aided by memories of the same general tone, until he finally grew into an apparently independent being, revealing himself through the table, manifesting a will and a mind of his own, recalling analogous former incidents of Hélène's life, and claiming for himself the merit of having intervened in it in the rôle of her protector.

Once established, this secondary self could not do otherwise than to grow, and to develop and strengthen itself in all directions, assimilating to itself a host of new data favoring the state of suggestibility which accompanies the exercise of mediumship. Without the spiritism and the autohypnotization of the seances, Leopold could never have been truly developed into a personality, but would have continued to remain in the nebulous, incoherent

p. 93

state of vague subliminal reveries and of occasional automatic phenomena.

The second problem, that of explaining why this secondary personality, once established, believes itself to be Cagliostro rather than any other celebrated personage, or of remaining simply the anonymous guardian angel of Mlle. Smith, would demand a very complete knowledge of the thousand outside influences which have surrounded Hélène since the beginning of her mediumship, and which may have involuntarily influenced her.

But on this point I have only succeeded in collecting a very few incidents, which leave much still to be desired, and are of such a character that it is entirely permissible for any one to claim that the purely psychological origin of that personality is not clearly established, and to prefer, if he chooses, the actual intervention of the disincarnate Joseph Balsamo to my hypothesis of autosuggestion.

The following, however, are the facts advanced by me in support of the latter:

The authoritative and jealous spirit, the evident enemy of the N. group, who manifested himself on the 26th of August, 1892, under the name of Leopold, did not reveal his identity as that of Cagliostro until some time afterwards, under the following circumstances:

One of the most regular attendants at the reunions of the N. group was a Mme. B., who had long been an adherent of spiritism, and who had previously attended numerous seances at the house of M. and Mme. Badel, a thoroughly convinced couple

p. 94

of amateurs, now deceased, whose salon and round table have held a very honorable place in the history of Genevese occultism. But I learned from Mme. B. that one of the disincarnate spirits who manifested himself oftenest at the seances of M. and Mme. Badel was this very Joseph Balsamo. There is, indeed, no figure in history which accords better with the idea of a posthumous return to the mysteries of the round table than that of the enigmatic Sicilian, especially since Alexandre Dumas, père, has surrounded him with an additional halo of romance.

Not content with the public reunions of the N. group, Mme. B. often invited Hélène to her house for private seances, of which no record was made. At one of these, Hélène having had a vision of Leopold, who pointed out to her with a wand a decanter, Mme. B. suddenly thought of a celebrated episode in the life of Cagliostro, and after the seance she proceeded to take from a drawer and show to Hélène an engraving taken from an illustrated edition of Dumas, representing the famous scene of the decanter between Balsamo and the Dauphin at the château of Taverney. At the same time she gave utterance to the idea that the spirit who manifested himself at the table by means of Hélène's hands was certainly Joseph Balsamo; and she expressed her astonishment that Hélène had given him the name of Leopold, to which Helene replied that it was he himself who had given that name. Mme. B., continuing her deductions, told Mlle. Smith that perhaps she had formerly been the medium of the great magician, and consequently had been Lorenza Feliciani in a former life. Hélène at once accepted the

p. 95

idea, and for several weeks considered herself to be the reincarnation of Lorenza, until one day a lady of her acquaintance remarked that it was impossible, Lorenza Feliciani having never existed save in the imagination and the romances of Alexandre Dumas, père. *

Thus dispossessed of her supposed former existence, Hélène was not long in declaring through the table that she was Marie Antoinette. As to Leopold, a short time after Mme. B. had hypothetically identified him with Cagliostro, he himself confirmed that hypothesis at a seance of the N. group, dictating to the table that his real name was Joseph Balsamo.

The origin of the name of Leopold is very obscure, and many hypotheses have been advanced to account for it without our being able to establish any of them with certainty.

One fact, however, is certain, namely, that save for the vague affirmation that he had known Hélène in a previous existence, Leopold had never pretended to be Cagliostro, or given any reason for being thought so, before the reunion where Mme. B., who had been for some time accustomed to manifestations of that personage, announced the supposition and showed Mlle. Smith immediately after the seance (at a moment when she was probably still in a very suggestible state) an engraving from Dumas’ works representing Balsamo and the Dauphin. From that day Leopold, on his part, never failed to claim that personality, and progressively to realize the character of the rôle in a very remarkable manner, as we shall see.

p. 96

II. PERSONIFICATION OF BALSAMO BY LEOPOLD
There is no need, I think, to remind the reader of the well-known fact—so often described under the names of objectivity of types, personification, change of personality, etc.—that a hypnotized subject can be transformed by a word into such other living being as may be desired, according to the measure in which his suggestibility on the one hand and the vividness of his imagination and the fulness of his stored-up knowledge or- memories on the other, enables him to fulfil the rôle which is imposed upon him. Without investigating here to what extent mediums may be likened to hypnotized subjects, it is undeniable that an analogous phenomenon takes place in them; but the process is more gradual, and may extend itself over several years. In place of the immediate metamorphosis which modifies at one stroke and instantly, conformably to a prescribed type, the attitude, the physiognomy, the gestures, the words, the intonations of voice, the style, the handwriting, and other functions besides, we are, in the case of the medium, in the presence of a development formed by successive stages arranged according to grades, with intervals of different lengths, which finally succeed in creating a complete personality, all the more astonishing, at first sight, because the involuntary suggestions have not been noticed, the accumulations of which have little by little caused its birth. This process of development

p. 97

is present in a high degree in the case of Mlle. Smith, in the elaboration of her secondary personality, Leopold-Cagliostro.

In the beginning, in 1892 and 1893, this "spirit" only manifested himself by the brief periods of sleep which he induced in Hélène at certain seances, by raps struck upon the table, by visions in which he showed himself clothed in black and of youthful appearance, and, more rarely, by auditive hallucinations. His character and the content of his messages were summed up in imperious, authoritative, domineering manners, with the pretension of claiming Mlle. Smith all for himself, of defending her against the influences of the N. group, and, finally, of detaching her from that environment.

There was nothing, however, in this general character of monopoly and of protection which specially recalled the Balsamo of history or of romance. The personification of complete objectivity of this established type really began only in 1894, when Leopold had no longer to struggle with an environment foreign to his nature. The subconscious psychological task of realization of the proposed model could then be followed by him more freely; in spiritistic terms, Joseph Balsamo was able to manifest himself and make himself known in a manner more complete through Hélène as an intermediary, while continuing to follow and protect her as the reincarnation of the royal object of his passion.

At the seances held with M. Cuendet, Leopold frequently showed himself to Hélène clothed after the fashion of the last century and with a face like

p. 98

that of Louis XVI., under the different phases of his multiplex genius. He also showed himself to her in his laboratory, surrounded by utensils and instruments appropriate to the sorcerer and alchemist that he was; or, again, as the physician and possessor of secret elixirs, the knowledge of which is productive of consultations or remedies for the use of sitters who need them; or, again, as the illumined theosophist, the verbose prophet of the brotherhood of man, who diffuses limping Alexandrine verses—which seem to have been inherited from his predecessor, Victor Hugo—containing exhortations a little weak at times, but always stamped with a pure moral tone, elevated and noble sentiments, and a very touching religious spirit—in short, a fine example of that "ethico-deific verbiage" (if I may be allowed the expression, which is an Americanism), which, both in prose and in verse, is one of the most frequent and estimable products of mediumship.

But it was not until 1895 that Leopold, benefiting by the progress made by the automatic phenomena in Hélène, multiplied and perfected his processes of communication. The first step consisted in substituting, in his dictations by spelling, the movements of the hand or of a single finger for those of the whole table. This was the immediate result of a suggestion of mine.

The second step in advance was the handwriting, which shows two stages. In the first, Leopold gave Hélène the impression of a phrase (verbo-visual hallucination), which she copied in pencil on a sheet of paper, in her own handwriting. The second,

p. 99

 Fig. 3. Handwriting of Leopold.
Click to enlarge
Fig. 3. Handwriting of Leopold.

Fragments of two letters, one in Alexandrine verse, the other in prose, entirely in the hand of Leopold, automatically written by Mlle. Smith in spontaneous hemisomnambulism.

 Fig. 4. Normal handwriting of Mlle. Smith.
Click to enlarge
Fig. 4. Normal handwriting of Mlle. Smith.

p. 100

which was only accomplished five months later, and which consisted in writing directly with Hélène's hand, permitted the immediate establishment of three curious facts. One is, that Leopold holds his pen in the usual manner, the handle resting between the thumb and the index-finger, while Hélène, in writing, always holds her pen-handle or pencil between the index and middle fingers, a very rare habit with us. The next is that Leopold has an entirely different handwriting from that of Hélène, a calligraphy more regular, larger, more painstaking, and with marked differences in the formation of the letters (see Figs. 3 and 4). The third is that he uses the style of handwriting of the last century, and puts an o instead of an a in the tenses of the verbs, j’amois, for j’amais, etc. These three characteristics he has never departed from during all the four years that I have been accumulating specimens of his handwriting.

The following is a résumé of the seances at which these two innovations took place.

April 21, 1895.—As I had just asked Leopold a question which he did not like, Hélène, being in a state of hemisomnambulism, with a pencil and some sheets of paper placed before her, in the hope of obtaining some communication (not from Leopold), seemed about to plunge into a very interesting perusal of one of the blank sheets; then, at my request, which she with difficulty comprehended, she commenced to write rapidly and nervously on another sheet, in her usual handwriting, a copy of the imaginary text which Leopold was showing her ("in

p. 101

fluid letters," as he said afterwards at the seance) as follows: "My thoughts are not thy thoughts, and thy wishes are not mine, friend Flournoy—Leopold." At the final awakening Hélène recognized perfectly her own handwriting in his phrase, but had no recollection of the occurrence.

September 22, 1895.—After different visions and some stanzas of Victor Hugo, dictated by the table, Hélène appeared to suffer considerably in her right arm, which she was holding at the wrist with her left hand, when the table at which she was seated gave out the following, dictated by Leopold: "I shall hold her hand," meaning that it was he, Leopold, who was causing Mlle. Smith to suffer pain by seizing her right hand. As she seemed to feel very badly and began to weep, Leopold was asked to desist; but he refused, and, still speaking through the table, said, "Give her some paper," then, "More light." Writing material was furnished her and the lamp brought in, which Hélène gazed at fixedly, while Leopold continued to dictate (this time with the little finger of her left hand), "Let her gaze on the lamp until she forgets the pain in her arm." She then seemed, in fact, to forget her pain, and to find satisfaction in looking at the lamp; then she fastened her eyes on the paper, and seemed to read something there which she endeavored to copy in pencil. But here the right hand began a curious alternation of contrary motions, expressing in a very clear manner a contest with Leopold, who was trying to compel her to hold the pencil in a certain way, which Hélène refused to do, with a great pretence

p. 102

of anger. She persisted in holding it between the index and middle fingers, as was her wont, while Leopold wanted her to hold it in the usual way, between the thumb and the index-finger, and said: "I do not wish her to . . . she is holding the pencil very badly." The right index-finger then went through a very comical gymnastic performance, being seized with a tremor, which caused her to place it on one side or the other of the pencil, according to whether it was Leopold or Hélène who was victorious; during this time she frequently raised her eyes, with a look sometimes reproachful, sometimes supplicating, as if to gaze at Leopold standing by her side endeavoring to force her to hold the pencil in the manner he preferred. After a contest of nearly twenty minutes, Hélène, vanquished and completely subdued by Leopold, seemed to be absent, while her hand, holding the pencil in the manner she did not like, wrote slowly the two following lines, followed by a rapid and feverish signature of Leopold:

"Mes vers sont si mauvais que pour toi j’aurois dû
 Laisser à tout jamais le poète têtu.—Leopold."
[paragraph continues] An allusion, which was of no importance, to a remark made by me at the commencement of the seance on the verses of Victor Hugo and those of Leopold frequently dictated by the table. The seance lasted some time longer; on awakening, Hélène vaguely remembered having seen Leopold, but knew nothing more concerning the handwriting scene.

It is a fact that while her other incarnations are always accomplished passively and without any

p. 103

struggle, that of Leopold has the peculiarity of regularly provoking more or less resistance on the part of Hélène. " I do not make of her all that I wish . . . she is headstrong. . . . I do not know whether I shall succeed. . . . I do not believe I can master her to-day . . . " replies he often when asked to incarnate himself or write with her hand, and, indeed, his efforts often fail. There exists between Hélène and her guide a curious phenomenon of contrast and opposition, which only breaks out in the higher and more recent forms of motor automatism, the handwriting, the speech, or the complete incarnation, but from which the sensory messages and simple raps on the table or of the finger are free. It is very possible that the idea, very antipathetic to Hélène, of the hypnotizer mastering his subjects in spite of themselves—of the disincarnated Cagliostro using his medium as a simple tool—has been subconsciously the origin of this constant note of revolt against the total domination of Leopold, and of the intense suffering which accompanied his first incarnations, and which has slowly diminished through her becoming accustomed to the process, though it has never been completely banished.

After the handwriting, in its turn came speech, which also was attained by means of two stages. In a first attempt Leopold only succeeded in giving Hélène his intonation and pronunciation after a seance in which she suffered acutely in her mouth and in her neck, as though her vocal organs were being manipulated or removed; she began to talk in a natural tone, and was apparently wide awake

p. 104

and feeling well, but spoke with a deep bass voice, and a strong, easily recognizable Italian accent. It was not until a year later that Leopold was finally able to speak himself by the mouth of Mlle. Smith, while she was completely entranced, and who did not retain on awakening any memory of this strange occurrence. Since then the complete control of the medium by her guide is a frequent occurrence at the seances, and affords a tableau very characteristic and always impressive.

Leopold succeeds in incarnating himself only by slow degrees and progressive stages. Hélène then feels as though her arms had been seized, or as if they were absent altogether; then she complains of disagreeable sensations, which were formerly painful, in her throat, the nape of her neck, and in her head; her eyelids droop; her expression changes; her throat swells into a sort of double chin, which gives her a likeness of some sort to the well-known figure of Cagliostro. All at once she rises, then, turning slowly towards the sitter whom Leopold is about to address, draws herself up proudly, turns her back quickly, sometimes with her arms crossed on her breast with a magisterial air, sometimes with one of them hanging down while the other is pointed solemnly towards heaven, and with her fingers makes a sort of masonic sign, which never varies. Soon after a series of hiccoughs, sighs, and various noises indicate the difficulty Leopold is experiencing in taking hold of the vocal apparatus; the words come forth slowly but strong; the deep bass voice of a man, slightly confused, with a pronunciation and accent

p. 105

markedly foreign, certainly more like Italian than anything else. Leopold is not always easily understood, especially when his voice swells and thunders out a reply to some indiscreet question or to the disrespectful remarks of some skeptical sitter. He speaks thickly, pronounces g like j, and all his u’s like ou, accents the final syllables, embellishes his vocabulary with obsolete words, or words which do not fit the circumstances, such as fiole for bouteille, omnibus for tramways, etc. He is pompous, grandiloquent, unctuous, sometimes severe and terrible, sometimes also sentimental. He says "thee" and "thou" to everybody, and appears to believe that he is still grand-master of the secret societies, from the emphatic and sonorous manner in which he pronounces the words "Brother" or "And thou, my sister," by which he addresses the sitters. Although he generally addresses himself to one of them in particular, and holds very little collective discourse, he is in touch with every one, listens to everything that is said, and each one may have his turn in conversation with him. Ordinarily he keeps his eyelids closed: he has, nevertheless, been persuaded to open his eyes in order to permit the taking of a photograph by a flash light. I regret that Mlle. Smith would not consent to the publication of her photographs, either in her normal state or in that of Leopold, in connection with the reproduction of a portrait of Cagliostro. * The reader may assure himself

p. 106

that when she incarnates her guide she really assumes a certain resemblance of features to him, and there is something in her attitude which is sometimes somewhat theatrical, but sometimes really majestic, which corresponds well to the generally received idea of this personage, whether he is regarded as a clever impostor or as a wonderful genius.

Speech is the apogee of the incarnations of Leopold; often interrupted by fits of hiccoughs and spasms, it seems to be injurious to Hélène's organism, and there are some seances at which attempts to produce it fail to succeed. Leopold, on these occasions, indicates his impotence and the fatigue of the medium by his gestures, and is then reduced to the necessity of expressing himself by digital dictations or handwriting, or else to giving Hélène verbo-auditive hallucinations, the content of which she repeats in her natural voice.

From the point of view of ease and mobility of the entire organism, there is a notable difference between Leopold and the other incarnations of Hélène: these last seem to be effected with much more facility than in the case of that of her guide par excellence. In the case of the Hindoo princess and that of Marie Antoinette, the perfection of the play, the suppleness and freedom of movement, are always admirable. It is true there is no question here, according to the spiritistic doctrine and the subconscious ideas of Mlle. Smith, of incarnations properly so called, since it

p. 107

is she herself who simply returns to that which she formerly was, by a sort of reversion or prenatal ecmnesia; she does not undergo, in consequence, any foreign possession, and can in these rôles preserve her natural identity and the entire disposition of her faculties. But still the occasional incarnation of different personalities, such as those of deceased parents or friends of the spectators, are often more easily and quickly effected than that of Leopold. Hélène moves in these cases with more vivacity and changes of attitude. In the rôle of Cagliostro, on the other hand, with the exception of the grandiose and not very frequent movements of the arms, once standing, she remains motionless, or only with difficulty advancing a little way towards the person to whom she addresses her discourse.

The content of the oral conversations of Leopold, as well as of his other messages by the various sensory and motor processes, is too varied for me to describe here: the numerous examples scattered through this work only can give an idea of it.

III. LEOPOLD AND THE TRUE JOSEPH BALSAMO
It would naturally be supposed that Leopold would have given us, by means of the psychological perfection of his partial or total incarnations and by the content of his messages; such a living likeness of Cagliostro that there would have been occasion to ask whether it is not really the latter who actually "returns," in the same way that Dr. Hodgson and his

p. 108

colleagues ask themselves whether it is not actually George Pelham who manifests himself through Mrs. Piper. Let us suppose, for example, that Leopold possessed a handwriting, an orthography, a style identical with that which is found here and there in the manuscripts of Joseph Balsamo; that he spoke French, Italian, or German, as that cosmopolitan adventurer did, and with all the same peculiarities; that his conversations and messages were full of precise allusions to actual events in his life, and also of unpublished but verifiable facts, etc. In that case the difficult and delicate task of proving that Mlle. Smith had no knowledge through normal methods of these thousand exact features would still remain, and we should not be forced to ask whether this soi-disant authentic revenant is simply a very well-gotten-up simulacrum, an admirable reconstruction, a marvellous imitation, such as the subliminal faculties are only too glad to produce for the diversion of psychologists and the mystification of the simple.

This problem is not given to us. I regret it, but it is true, nevertheless—to my mind, at least, for in these matters it is prudent to speak only for one's self—that there is no reason to suspect the real presence of Joseph Balsamo behind the automatisms of Mlle. Smith.

That there are very curious analogies between what is known to us of Cagliostro and certain characteristic traits of Leopold, I do not deny, but they are precisely such as accord very well with the supposition of the subliminal medley.

p. 109

 Fig. 5. Handwriting of Joseph Balsamo.
Click to enlarge
Fig. 5. Handwriting of Joseph Balsamo.

Fragment of a letter to his wife, reproduced in L’Isographie des Hommes célèbres.

p. 110

Let us consider first the handwriting. To facilitate the comparison, I have reproduced here (see pp. 109 and 111) some fragments of letters of Cagliostro and of Leopold and of Hélène. Let us suppose—which is, perhaps, open to discussion—that the handwriting of Leopold, by its regularity, its firmness, resembles that of Balsamo more than that of Mlle. Smith; the degree of resemblance does not, I think, go beyond that which might be expected considering the notorious fact that handwriting reflects the psychological temperament and modifies itself in accordance with the state of the personality. *

It is well known how the calligraphy of a hyptonized subject varies according to the suggestion that he shall personate Napoleon, Harpagon, a little girl, or an old man; there is nothing surprising in the fact that the hypnoid secondary personality of Hélène, which imagines itself to be the powerful and manly Count of Cagliostro, should be accompanied by muscular tensions communicating to the handwriting itself a little of that solidity and breadth which are found in the autograph of Balsamo. To this, however, the analogy is limited. The dissimilarities in the detail and the formation of the letters are such that the only conclusion which they warrant is that Mlle. Smith, or her subconsciousness, has never laid eyes on the manuscripts of Cagliostro. They are, indeed, rare, but the facilities she might have had, of which she has riot thought of taking

p. 111

 Fig. 6. Normal Handwriting of Mlle. Smith
Click to enlarge
Fig. 6. Normal Handwriting of Mlle. Smith

 Fig. 7. Handwriting of Leopold.
Click to enlarge
Fig. 7. Handwriting of Leopold.

Fragment and signature of one of his letters, written by Mlle. Smith, in spontaneous hemisomnambulism.

p. 112

advantage, for consulting in the Geneva public library the same volume from which I took Fig. 5, would prove, at least, her good faith and her honesty, if it were in the least necessary. The extravagant signature of Leopold with which all his messages are subscribed (see Fig. 7) recalls in no wise that of Alessandro di Cagliostro at the bottom of Fig. 5.

The archaic forms of orthography, j’aurois for j’aurais, etc., which appear above the first autograph of Leopold (see p. 99), and which occur again in the messages of Marie Antoinette, constitute a very pretty hit, of which the ordinary self would probably never dream by way of voluntary imitation, but by which the subconscious imagination has seen fit to profit. It is undoubtedly a matter for wonderment that Mlle. Smith, who has not gone very deep into literary studies, should, nevertheless, have retained these orthographic peculiarities of the eighteenth century; but we must not overlook the fineness of choice, the refined sensibility, the consummate, albeit instinctive, art which presides over the sorting and storing away of the subconscious memories. By some natural affinity, the idea of a personage of a certain epoch attracts and gathers into its net everything that the subject can possibly learn or hear spoken concerning the fashion of writing, of speaking, or acting, peculiar to that epoch. I do not know whether Balsamo ever used the French language and the orthography that Leopold employs. Even if he did, it would not weaken the hypothesis of the subliminal imitation, but if, on the other hand, it should be ascertained that he

p. 113

did not, the hypothesis would be greatly strengthened thereby.

As for the speech, I am ignorant as to how, with what accent and what peculiarities of pronunciation, Balsamo spoke the French tongue, and to what degree, in consequence, his reconstruction by Hélène's subliminal fantasy correctly hits it. If this point could be cleared up, it would probably be found to be just like that of the handwriting. Nothing could be more natural than to ascribe to the chevalier d’industrie of Palermo a very masculine, deep-bass voice, and, it goes without saying, as Italian as possible. It must be noted, too, that Mlle. Smith often heard her father speak that language, which he knew very well, with several of his friends; but that, on the other hand, she does not speak it, and has never learned it. Leopold, however, does not know Italian, and turns a deaf ear when any one addresses him in that language. The intonation, the attitude, the whole physiognomy, in short, accord with these remarks. As to the extremely varied content of the conversations and messages of Leopold, we are not obliged to consider Balsamo as their necessary author. When everything relating to Mlle. Smith and the sitters, but which has nothing to do with the last century, has been swept aside, together with the spiritistic dissertations in regard to the "fluid" manner in which Leopold exists, perceives, and moves, the three subjects or categories of communications still remain, which merit a rapid examination.

In the first place, there. are the answers of Leopold

p. 114

to the questions put to him concerning his terrestrial life. These answers are remarkably evasive or vague. Not a name, not a date, not a precise fact does he furnish. We only learn that he has travelled extensively, suffered greatly, studied deeply, done much good, and healed a great many sick folk; but now he sees things too lofty to think any more about historic details of the past, and it is with unconcealed disgust or direct words of reproach for the idle curiosity of his carnal questioners that he hastens to turn the conversation, like Socrates, to moral subjects and those of a lofty philosophy, where he feels evidently more at ease. When he is further pressed he becomes angry sometimes, and sometimes ingenuously avows his ignorance, enveloping it meanwhile in an air of profound mystery. " They are asking the secret of my life, of my acts, of my thoughts. I cannot answer." This does not facilitate investigation of the question of identity.

In the second place come the consultations and medical prescriptions. Leopold affects a lofty disdain for modern medicine and phenic acid. He is as archaic in his therapeutics as in his orthography, and treats all maladies after the ancient mode. Baths of pressed grape-skins for rheumatism, an infusion of coltsfoot and juniper-berry in white wine for inflammations of the chest, the bark of the horse-chestnut in red wine and douches of salt water as tonics, tisanes of hops and other flowers, camomile, oil of lavender, the leaves of the ash, etc.; all these do not accord badly with what Balsamo might have prescribed a century or more ago. The misfortune,

p. 115

from the evidential point of view, is that Mlle. Smith's mother is extremely well versed in all the resources of popular medicine where old recipes are perpetuated. She has had occasion to nurse many sick people in her life, knows the virtues of different medicinal plants, and constantly employs, with a sagacity which I have often admired, a number of those remedies spoken of as "old-women's," which make the young doctors fresh from the clinic smile, but to which they will more than once resort in secret after a few years of medical experience.

Finally, there still remain the sentiments of Leopold for Hélène, which he claims are only the continuation of those of Cagliostro for Marie Antoinette. My ignorance of history does not permit me to pronounce categorically on this point. That the Queen of France did have some secret interviews with the famous "gold-maker," due to simple curiosity or to questions of material interest, there is no doubt, I believe; but that his feelings for his sovereign were a curious combination of the despairing passion of Cardinal Rohan for the queen, with the absolute respect which Alexandre Dumas, père, ascribes to Joseph Balsamo towards Lorenza Feliciani, appears to me less evident.

In short, if the revelations of Leopold have truly unveiled to us shades of feeling of Count Cagliostro hitherto unsuspected, and of which later documentary researches shall confirm the historic correctness—why, so much the better, for that will finally establish a trace of the supernormal in the mediumship of Hélène!

p. 116

IV. LEOPOLD AND MLLE. SMITH
The connection between these two personalities is too complex for a precise description. There is neither a mutual exclusion, as between Mrs. Piper and Phinuit, who appear reciprocally to be ignorant of each other and to be separated by the tightest of partitions; nor a simple jointing, as in the case of Felida X., whose secondary state envelops and overflows the whole primary state. This is more of a crossing of lines, but of which the limits are vague and with difficulty assignable. Leopold knows, foresees, and recalls very many things of which the normal personality of Mlle. Smith knows absolutely nothing, not only of those which she may simply have forgotten, but of those of which she never had any consciousness. On the other hand, he is far from possessing all the memories of Hélène; he is ignorant of a very great part of her daily life; even some very notable incidents escape him entirely, which explains his way of saying that, to his great regret, he cannot remain constantly by her, being obliged to occupy himself with other missions (concerning which he has never enlightened us) which oblige him often to leave her for a time.

These two personalities are, therefore, not co-extensive; each one passes beyond the other at certain points, without its being possible for us to say which is, on the whole, the more extended. As to their common domain, if it cannot be defined by one word with entire certainty, it appears, nevertheless, to be

p. 117

chiefly constituted by its connection with the innermost ranges of the being, both physiological and psychological, as might be suspected from what I remarked above concerning the real origin of Leopold. Physician of the soul and of the body, director of conscience, and at the same time hygienic counsellor, he does not always manifest himself immediately, but he is always present when Hélène's vital interests are involved. This will be made clearer by two or three concrete examples, which will at the same time illustrate some of the psychological processes by which Leopold manifests himself to Hélène.

It must be admitted that there is a disagreement and opposition as complete as possible (but how far does this "possible" go?) when Hélène, in at least an apparently waking state, converses with her guide, manifestly by a partial sensory or motor automatism; for example, in the case cited on page 64, where Leopold, not sharing the allochiria of Hélène, declared by the table that she was wrong, so emphatically that she protested and became angry; also, when in verbo-auditive hallucinations, or by automatic handwriting, he enters into discussion with her, and she holds her own with him; or, again, when the organism seems to be divided up between two different persons, Leopold speaking by Hélène's mouth, with his accent, and uttering his own ideas to her, and she complaining, in writing, of pains in her head and throat, without understanding their cause. Nevertheless, in these cases of division of the consciousness, which appear to amount to its cutting

p. 118

in two, it is doubtful whether this plurality is more than apparent. I am not positive of having ever established with Hélène a veritable simultaneity of different consciousnesses. At the very moment at which Leopold writes by her hand, speaks by her mouth, dictates to the table, upon observing her attentively I have always found her absorbed, preoccupied, as though absent; but she instantaneously recovers her presence of mind and the use of her waking faculties at the end of the motor automatism. In short, that which from the outside is taken for the coexistence of distinct simultaneous personalities seems to me to be only an alternation, a rapid succession between the state of Hélène-consciousness and the state of Leopold-consciousness; and, in the case where the body seems to be jointly occupied by two independent beings—the right side, for instance, being occupied by Leopold, and the left by Hélène, or the Hindoo princess—the psychical division has never seemed to me to be radical, but many indications have combined to make me of the opinion that behind all was an individuality perfectly self-conscious, and enjoying thoroughly, along with the spectators, the comedy of the plural existences.

A single fundamental personality, putting the questions and giving the answers, quarrelling with itself in its own interior—in a word, enacting all the various rôles of Mlle. Smith—is a fitting interpretation, which accords very well with the facts as I have observed them in Hélène, and very much better than the theory of a plurality of separate consciousnesses,

p. 119

of a psychological polyzoism, so to speak. This last theory is doubtless more convenient for a clear and superficial description of the facts, but I am not at all convinced that it conforms to the actual condition of affairs.

It is a state of consciousness sui generis, which it is impossible adequately to describe, and which can only be represented by the analogy of those curious states, exceptional in the normal waking life, but less rare in dreams, when one seems to change his identity and become some one else.

Hélène has more than once told me of having had the impression of becoming or being momentarily Leopold. This happens most frequently at night, or upon awakening in the morning. She has first a fugitive vision of her protector; then it seems that little by little he is submerged in her; she feels him overcoming and penetrating her entire organism, as if he really became her or she him. These mixed states are extremely interesting to the psychologist; unhappily, because they generally take place in a condition of consecutive amnesia, or because the mediums do not know how, or do not wish, to give a complete account of them, it is very rare that detailed descriptions are obtained.

Between the two extremes of complete duality and complete unity numerous intermediate states are to be observed; or, at least, since the consciousness of another cannot be directly penetrated, these mixed states may be inferred from the consequences which spring from them.

It has happened, for example, that, believing they

p. 120

were dealing with Leopold alone, thoroughly incarnated and duly substituted for the personality of Mlle. Smith, the sitters have allowed to escape them on that account some ill-timed pleasantry, some indiscreet question or too free criticisms, all innocent enough and without evil intention, but still of a nature to wound Hélène if she had heard them, and from which the authors would certainly have abstained in her presence in a waking state.

Leopold has not stood upon ceremony in putting down these imprudent babblers, and the incident, generally, has had no further consequences. But sometimes the words and bearing of Mlle. Smith for days or weeks afterwards show that she was aware of the imprudent remarks, which proves that the consciousness of Leopold and her own are not separated by an impenetrable barrier, but that osmotic changes are effected from the one to the other. It is ordinarily pointed and irritating remarks which cause the trouble, which goes to prove that it is the feelings of self-love or personal susceptibility that form in each one of us the inmost fortifications of the social self, and are the last to be destroyed by somnambulism, or that they constitute the fundamental substratum, the common base by which Leopold and Mlle. Smith form a whole and mingle themselves in the same individuality.

The psychological process of this transmission is varied from another cause. Sometimes it appears that the consecutive amnesia of the trance has been broken as to the most piquant details, and that Hélène clearly remembers that which has been said, in the

p. 121

presence of Leopold, disagreeable to herself. Some times it is Leopold himself who repeats to her the unpleasant expressions which have been used, with commentaries calculated to lessen their effect and to excuse the culprits: for it is an interesting trait of his character that he undertakes with Hélène the defence of those same persons whom he reprimands and blames, a contradiction not at all surprising when it is psychologically interpreted, considering the habitual conflict of emotional motives or tendencies, the warfare which opposite points of view is incessantly carrying on in our inmost being. Sometimes, again, it is in a dream that the junction is effected between the somnambulistic consciousness of Leopold and the normal consciousness of Hélène.

Apropos of the last case, here is an example containing nothing disagreeable, in which Hélène remembered in her waking state a nocturnal dream, which was itself a repetition or echo, in natural sleep, of a somnambulistic scene of the previous evening.

In a seance at which I assisted, shortly after my recovery from an attack of congestion of the lungs, Hélène, completely entranced, has a vision of Leopold-Cagliostro, who, in the rôle of sympathetic physician, comes to hold a consultation with me. After some preliminaries she kneels down by my chair, and, looking alternately at my chest and at the fictitious doctor standing between us, she holds a long conversation with him, in which she explains the condition of my lungs, which she sees in imagination, and the treatment which Leopold prescribes, somewhat as follows:

p. 122

[paragraph continues] ". . . It is the lungs . . . it is darker . . . it is one side which has been affected . . . You say that it is a severe inflammation—and can that be healed? . . . Tell me, what must be done . . . Oh, where have I seen any of these plants? . . . I don't know what they are called . . . those . . . I don't understand very well . . . those synantherous? . . . Oh, what a queer name . . . Where are they to be found? . . . You say it belongs to the family of . . . then it has another name? Tell me what it is . . . some tissulages [sic] . . . Then you think this plant is good for him? . . . Ah! but explain this to me . . . the fresh leaves or the dried flowers? Three times a day, a large handful in a pint . . . and then honey and milk. . . . I will tell him that he must drink three cups a day . . ." etc. Then followed very detailed directions as to treatment, various infusions, blisters, etc. The whole scene lasted more than an hour, followed by complete amnesia, and nothing was said to Hélène about it, as it was half-past six in the evening, and she was in haste to return home. The next day she wrote me a seven-page letter in which she described a very striking dream she had had during the night. ". . . I fell asleep about two o'clock in the morning and awaked at about five. Was it a vision? Was it a dream I had? I don't really know what to consider it and dare not say; but this I do know, I saw my dear friend Leopold, who spoke to me a long time about you, and I think I saw you also. I asked him what he thought of your state of health. . . . He replied that in his opinion it was far from re-established, That the pain

p. 123

you feel in the right side came from an inflammation of the lung which has been seriously affected . . . You will doubtless laugh when I tell you that he also described the remedies you ought to take. . . . One of them is a simple plant, which is called, as nearly as I can remember, Tissulage or Tussilache, but has also another name, which I cannot recollect, but the first name will doubtless suffice, since he says you are familiar with the plant . . ." etc.

What I have said concerning Leopold is also applicable to the other personifications of Mlle. Smith. The normal consciousness of Hélène mingles and fuses itself in every way with the somnambulistic consciousness of Simandini, of Marie Antoinette, or some other incarnation, as we shall soon see. I pass now to the examination of some detailed examples, destined to throw light upon the rôle which Leopold plays in Hélène's existence.

Let us begin by listening to Leopold himself. Among his numerous messages, the following letter, written in his fine handwriting by the hand of Mlle. Smith—in response to a note in which I had begged him (as a spiritual being and distinct from her) to aid me in my " psychic researches"—contains information for which I had not asked, but which was none the less interesting. It must not be forgotten that it is the disincarnate adorer of Marie Antoinette who is writing:

 

"Friend,—I am pleased and touched by the mark of confidence you have deigned to accord me. The spiritual guide of Mademoiselle [Smith], whom the

p. 124

[paragraph continues] Supreme Being in his infinite goodness has permitted me to find again with ease, I do all I can to appear to her on every occasion when I deem it necessary; but my body, or, if you prefer, the matter of little solidity of which I am composed, does not always afford me the facility of showing myself to her in a positive human manner. [He, in fact, appeared to her often under the form of elementary visual hallucinations, a luminous trail, whitish column, vaporous streamer, etc.]

"That which I seek above all to inculcate in her is a consoling and true philosophy, which is necessary to her by reason of the profound, unhappy impressions, which even now still remain to her, of the whole drama of her past life. I have often sown bitterness in her heart [when she was Marie Antoinette], desiring only her welfare. Also, laying aside everything superfluous, I penetrate into the most hidden recesses of her soul, and with an extreme care and incessant activity I seek to implant there those truths which I trust will aid her in attaining the lofty summit of the ladder of perfection.

"Abandoned by my parents front my cradle, I have, indeed, known sorrow early in life. Like all, I have had many weaknesses, which I have expiated, and God knows that I bow to His will!

"Moral suffering has been my principal lot. I have been full of bitterness, of envy, of hatred, of jealousy. Jealousy, my brother! what a poison, what a corruption of the soul!

"Nevertheless, one ray has shone brightly into my life, and that ray so pure, so full of everything

p. 125

that might pour balm on my wounded soul, has given, me a glimpse of heaven!

"Herald of eternal felicity! ray without spot! God deemed best to take it before me! But to-clay it is given back to me! May His holy name be blessed!

"Friend, in what manner shall I reply to you? I am ignorant myself, not knowing what it will please God to reveal to you, but through her whom you call Mademoiselle [Smith], God willing, perhaps we shall be able to satisfy you.

"Thy friend,

"LEOPOLD."

 

We can see, under the flowing details of the spiritistic ideas and his rôle as the repentant Cagliostro, that the dominant characteristic of Leopold is his deep platonic attachment for Mlle. Smith, and an ardent moral solicitude for her and her advance towards perfection. This corresponds perfectly with the character of the numerous messages which he addresses to her in the course of her daily existence, as may he seen from the following specimen. He is referring to a case where, after having warned her on two occasions during the day by auditive hallucinations that he would manifest himself in the evening, he gives her, in fact, by automatic writing in his own hand, the encouragement she was actually in need of under the circumstances in which she found herself.

One morning, at her desk, Hélène heard an unknown voice, stronger and nearer to her than is usual

p. 126

with Leopold, say to her: "Until this evening"; a little later the same voice, which she now recognized as that of Leopold, but of a quality rougher and nearer to her than was his habit, said to her: "You understand me well, until this evening." In the evening, having returned home, she was excited at supper, left the table in haste towards the end of the meal, and shut herself up in her room with the idea that she would learn something; but, presently, the instinctive agitation of her hand indicated to her that she should take her pencil, and having done so, she obtained in the beautiful calligraphy of Leopold the following epistle. (She says that she remained wide awake and self-conscious while writing it, and it is the only occasion of a similar character when she had knowledge of the content.)

 

"My beloved Friend,—Why do you vex yourself, torment yourself so? Why are you indignant, because, as you advance in life, you are obliged to acknowledge that all things are not as you had wished and hoped they might be? Is not the route we follow on this earth always and for all of us strewn with rocks? is it not an endless chain of deceptions, of miseries? Do me the kindness, my dear sister, I beg of you, to tell me that from this time forth you will cease from endeavoring to probe too deeply the human heart. In what will such discoveries aid you? What remains to you of these things, except tears and regrets? And then this God of love, of justice, and of life—is not He the one to read our hearts? It is for Him, not for thee, to see into them.

p. 127

"Would you change the hearts? Would you give them that which they have not, a live, ardent soul, never departing from what is right, just, and true? Be calm, then, in the face of all these little troubles. Be worthy, and, above all, always good! In thee I have found again that heart and that soul, both of which will always be for me all my life, all my joy, and my only dream here below.

"Believe me: be calm: reflect: that is my wish."

"Thy friend,

"Leopold."

I have chosen this example for the sake of its brevity. Hélène has received a number of communications of the same kind, sometimes in verse, in which the moral and religious note is often still more accentuated. In the greater part we meet with, as in the next to the last phrase of the foregoing letter, an allusion to the presumed affection of Cagliostro for Marie Antoinette. It is to be noticed that there is nothing in these excellent admonitions that a high and serious soul like that of Mlle. Smith could not have drawn from its own depths in a moment of contemplation and meditation.

Is it a benefit or an injury to the moral and truly religious life to formulate itself thus clearly in verbal hallucinations rather than to remain in the confused but more personal state of experienced aspirations and strongly expressed emotions? Do these inspirations gain or lose in inward authority and subjective power by assuming this exterior garb and this aspect of objectivity? This is a delicate

p. 128

question, probably not susceptible of a uniform solution.

In the following incident, which I relate as an example among many other similar ones, it is no longer, properly speaking, the moral and religious sentiments personified in Leopold, but rather the instinct of reserve and of defence peculiar to the weaker sex, the sense of the proprieties, the self-respect, tinctured with a shade of exaggeration almost amounting to prudery.

In a visit to Mlle. Smith, during which I inquired whether she had received any recent communications from Leopold, she told me she had only seen him two or three times in the last few days, and had been struck by his "restless and unhappy" air, instead of the air "so pleasant, so sweet, so admirable," which he generally has. As she did not know to what to attribute this change of countenance, I advised her to take her pencil and to wrap herself in meditation, with the hope of obtaining some automatic message.

In about a minute her expression indicated that she was being taken possession of; her eyes were fixed on the paper, upon which her left hand rested, the thumb and little finger being agitated and continually tapping (about once a second), the right hand having tried to take the pencil between the index and middle finger (the manner of Hélène), ended by seizing it between the thumb and the index finger, and traced slowly in the handwriting of Leopold:

"Yes, I am restless | pained, even in anguish. |

p. 129

[paragraph continues] Believest thou, friend, that it is with satisfaction | that I see you every day accepting the attentions, the flatteries; | I do not, call them insincere, but of little worth, and little praiseworthy | on the part of those from whom they come." |

This text was written at six separate times (marked by the vertical bars), separated by brief moments of full wakefulness, when the tappings of the left hand ceased, and when Hélène, repeating in a loud voice what she was about to write, is very much astonished, does not know to what Leopold alludes, then at my request takes her pencil to obtain an explanation, and falls asleep again during the following fragment. At the end of this bit, as she persists in saying that she is ignorant of what he refers to, I proceed to question Leopold, who replies that for several days Hélène has permitted herself to be courted by a M. V. (perfectly honorably), who often found himself on the same street-car with her, had made a place for her beside him the last few mornings, and had paid her some compliments on her appearance.

These revelations excited the laughter and protestations of Hélène, who commenced to deny that it could have come from Leopold, and accused me of having suggested it to her little finger; but the right hand took the pencil and traced these words in the handwriting and with the signature of Leopold: "I only say what I think, and I desire that you refuse henceforth all the flowers that he may offer you.—Leopold." This time Hélène remembered the incident, and recollected that yesterday morning he had

p. 130

offered her a rose which he was wearing as a boutonnière.

Eight days later I paid another visit to Hélène, and after an effort to secure some handwriting, which was not successful, but resulted in a Martian vision (see Martian text No. 14), she had a visual hallucination of Leopold, and losing consciousness of the actual environment and of my presence also, as well as that of her mother, she flung herself into a running conversation with him in regard to the incident of eight days previously: "Leopold . . . Leopold . . . don't come near me [repulsing him]. You are too severe, Leopold! . . . Will you come on Sunday? I am going to be at M. Flournoy's next Sunday. You will be there . . . but take good care that you do not . . . No, it is not kind of you always to disclose secrets. . . . What must he have thought? . . . You seem to make a mountain out of a mole-hill. . . . And who would think of refusing a flower? You don't understand at all. . . . Why, then? It was a very simple thing to accept it, a matter of no importance whatever . . . to refuse it would have been impolite. . . . You pretend to read the heart. . . . Why give importance to a thing that amounts to nothing? . . . It is only a simple act of friendship, a little token of sympathy . . . to make me write such things on paper before everybody! not nice of you!" In this somnambulistic dialogue, in which we can divine Leopold's replies, Hélène took for the moment the accent of Marie Antoinette (see below, in the "Royal cycle"). To awaken her, Leopold, who had possession of Hélène's arms, made

p. 131

some passes over her forehead, then pressed the frontal and suborbital nerves of the left side, and made me a sign to do the same with those of the right. The seance of the next day but one, at my house, passed without any allusion by Leopold to the incident of the street-car, evidently on account of the presence of certain sitters to whom he did not wish to reveal Hélène's secrets. But, three days after, in a new visit, during which she told me of having had a waking discussion concerning the future life (without telling me with whom), she again wrote, in the hand of Leopold: "It is not in such society as this that you ought so seriously to discuss the immortality of the soul." She then confessed that it was again on the street-car, and with M. V., that she had held that conversation while a funeral procession was passing. There was never anything that might have been of a compromising character in the exchange of courtesies and the occasional conversations of Mlle. Smith with her neighbor of the street-car. The trouble that it caused poor Leopold was very characteristic of him, and well indicated the severe and jealous censor who formerly had worried the N. group; there can be heard again the echo of that voice, "which has absolutely nothing to do with the conscience" (see pp. 27 and 82), and which has hitherto prevented Hélène from accepting any of the suitors whom she has encountered in the course of her journey through life. This austere and rigorous mentor, always wide awake, and taking offence at the least freedom which Mlle. Smith allows herself in the exchange of trifling courtesies,

p. 132

represents, in fact, a very common psychological attribute; it is not every well-bred feminine soul that carries stored in one of its recesses, where it manifests its presence by scruples more or less vaguely felt, certain hesitations or apprehensions, inhibiting feelings or tendencies of a shade of intensity varying according to the age and the temperament.

It is not my part to describe this delicate phenomenon. It suffices me to remark that here, as in the ethico-religious messages, the personality of Leopold has in no way aided the essential content of those inward experiences of which Mlle. Smith is perfectly capable by herself; the form only of their manifestation has gained in picturesque and dramatic expression in the mise-en-scène of the automatic handwritings and of the somnambulistic dialogue. It seems as though the suggestive approach of my presence and my questions had been necessary to excite these phenomena; it is, however, very probable, to judge from other examples, that my influence only hastened the explosion of Leopold in formulated reproaches, and that his latent discontent, hitherto noticed in the "restless and suffering air" of his fugitive visual apparitions, would have terminated, after a period of incubation more or less prolonged, in breaking out into spontaneous admonitions, auditive or written.

It can be divined that in this rôle of vigilant guardian, of an almost excessive zealousness for the honor or the dignity of Mlle. Smith, Leopold is again, to my mind, only a product of psychological duplication. He represents a certain grouping of inward

p. 133

desires and secret instincts, which the hypnoid predisposition, encouraged by spiritism, has brought into a peculiar prominence and given an aspect of foreign personality; in the same way, in the phantasmagoria of the dream, certain after-thoughts, almost unperceived while awake, rise to the first plane and become transformed into contradictory fictitious personages, whose cutting reproaches astonish us sometimes on awakening by their disturbing truthfulness.

A final example will show us Leopold, in his rôle of watcher over the health of Mlle. Smith and adviser of precautions which she ought to take. He is not troubled about her general health; when she had la grippe, for instance, or when she is simply worn out with fatigue, he scarcely shows himself. His attention is concentrated upon certain special physiological functions, of the normal exercise of which he takes care to be assured. He does not otherwise seem to exercise a positive action upon them, and cannot modify them in any way; his office seems to be confined to knowing beforehand their exact course, and to see that Hélène is not guilty of any imprudence which may impede them.

Leopold here shows a knowledge and prevision of the most intimate phenomena of the organism which has been observed in the case of secondary personalities, and which confers upon them, in that respect at least, an unquestionable advantage over the ordinary personality. In the case of Mlle. Smith, the indications of her guide are always of a prohibitive nature, calculated to prevent her from

p. 134

taking part in spiritistic reunions at a time at which she believes herself able to do so with impunity, but which he, endowed with a more refined cœnæsthetic sensibility, thinks she ought not to undertake. He has for several years formally laid his ban upon every kind of mediumistic exercises at certain very regular periods.

He has also on numerous occasions compelled her by various messages, categorical auditive hallucinations, diverse impulses, contractures of the arms, forcing her to write, etc., to modify her plans and to abandon seances already arranged. This is a very clear form of teleological automatism.

As a specimen of this spontaneous and hygienic intervention of Leopold in the life of Hélène, I have selected the letter given below, because it combines several interesting traits. It well depicts the energy with which Mlle. Smith is compelled to obey her guide.

The passage from the auditive to the graphic form of automatism is also to be noticed in it. Apropos of this, in the page of this letter reproduced in Fig. 8 (see p. 137), it is made clear that the transition of the hand of Hélène to that of Leopold is accomplished brusquely and in a decided manner. The handwriting is not metamorphosed gradually, slowly, but continues to be that of Mlle. Smith, becoming more and more agitated, it is true, and rendered almost illegible by the shocks to the arm of which Leopold takes hold up to the moment when, suddenly and by a bound, it becomes the well-formed calligraphy of Cagliostro.

p. 135

"January 29, 6.15 a.m.

"Monsieur,—I awoke about ten minutes ago, and heard the voice of Leopold telling me in a very imperious manner, 'Get up out of your bed, and quickly, very quickly, write to your dear friend, M. Flournoy, that you will not hold a seance to-morrow, and that you will not be able to go to his house for two weeks, and that you will not hold any seance within that period.' I have executed his order, having felt myself forced, compelled in spite of myself, to obey. I was so comfortable in bed and so vexed at being obliged to write you such a message; but I feel myself forced to do what he bids me.

"At this moment I am looking at my watch; it is 6.25 o'clock. I feel a very strong shock in my right arm—I might better speak of it as an electric disturbance—and which I perceive has made me . write crooked. I hear also at this instant the voice of Leopold. I have much difficulty in writing what he tells me: '6.42½ . Say to him this: I am, sir, always your very devoted servant, in body and mind, healthy and not unbalanced.'

"I stopped for some moments after writing these words, which I saw very well, after having written them, were in the handwriting of Leopold. Immediately afterwards, a second disturbance, similar to the first, gave me a fresh shock, this time from my feet to my head. It all passed so quickly that I am disturbed and confused by it. It is true that I am not yet quite well. Is this the reason why Leopold prevents my going to Florissant to-morrow? I do not know, but, nevertheless, am anxious to follow his advice. . . ."

p. 136

Mlle. Smith always submits obediently to the commands of her guide, since, whenever she has transgressed them, through forgetfulness or neglect, she has had cause to repent it.

It is clear that in this rôle of special physician of Mlle. Smith, always au courant of her state of health, Leopold could easily be interpreted as personifying those vague impressions which spring forth continually from the depths of our physical being, informing us as to what is passing there.

A neuralgic toothache is felt in a dream hours before it makes itself felt in our waking consciousness, while some maladies are often thus foreshadowed several days before they actually declare themselves. All literature is full of anecdotes of this kind; and the psychiatrists have observed that in the form of circular alienation, where phases of melancholic depression and maniacal excitation alternately succeed one another more or less regularly with intervals of normal equilibrium, it is frequently in sleep that the first symptoms of the change of humor can be detected which has already begun in the depths of the individuality, but will only break forth on the outside a little later. But all the hypnoid states are connected, and it is not at all surprising that, in the case of a subject inclined to automatism, these confused presentiments should arise with the appearance of a foreign personality which is only a degree higher than the process of dramatization already so brilliantly at work in our ordinary dreams.

It will be useless to lengthen or further multiply examples of the intervention of Leopold in the life of Mlle. Smith. Those which I have given show him under his essential aspects, and suffice to justify Hélène's confidence in a guide who has never deceived her, who has always given her the best counsel, delivered discourses of the highest ethical tone, and manifested the most touching solicitude for her physical and moral health. It is easy to understand that nothing can shake her faith in the real, objective existence of this precious counsellor.

It is really vexatious that the phenomena of dreams should be so little observed or so badly understood (I do not say by psychologists, but by the general public, which prides itself on its psychology), since the dream is the prototype of spiritistic messages, and holds the key to the explanation of mediumistic phenomena. If it is regrettable to see such noble, sympathetic, pure, and in all respects remarkable personalities as Leopold reduced to the rank of a dream creation, it must be remembered, however, that dreams are not always, as idle folk think, things to be despised or of no value in themselves: the majority are insignificant and deserve only the oblivion to which they are promptly consigned. A very large number are bad and sometimes even worse than reality; but there are others of a better sort, and "dream" is often a synonym for "ideal."

To sum up, Leopold certainly expresses in his central nucleus a very honorable and attractive side of the character of Mlle. Smith, and in taking him as her "guide" she only follows inspirations which are probably among the best of her nature.

THE title of this book would naturally commit me to a review of the Hindoo romance before investigating the Martian cycle. Considerations of method have caused me to reverse this order. It is better to advance from the simple to the complex, and while we certainly know less concerning the planet Mars than of India, the romance which it has inspired in the subliminal genius of Mlle. Smith is relatively less difficult to explain than the Oriental cycle. In fact, the former seems to spring from pure imagination, while in the latter we meet with certain actual historical elements, and whence Hélène's memory and intelligence have gained a knowledge of them is an extremely difficult problem for us to solve. There is, then, only one faculty at work in the Martian romance, as a professional psychologist would say, while the Oriental cycle calls several into play, making it necessary to treat of it later, on account of its greater psychological complexity.

While the unknown language which forms the vehicle of many of the Martian messages cannot naturally be dissociated from the rest of the cycle, it merits, nevertheless, a special consideration, and

p. 140

the following chapter will be entirely devoted to it. It does not figure in the present chapter, in which I shall treat of the origin and the content only of the Martian romance.

I. ORIGIN AND BIRTH OF THE MARTIAN CYCLE
"We dare to hope," says M. Camille Flammarion, at the beginning of his excellent work on the planet Mars, "that the day will come when scientific methods yet unknown to us will give us direct evidences of the existence of the inhabitants of other worlds, and at the same time, also, will put us in communication with our brothers in space." * And on the last page of his book he recurs to the same idea, and says: "What marvels does not the science of the future reserve for our successors, and who would dare to say that Martian humanity and terrestrial humanity will not some day enter into communication with each other?"

This splendid prospect seems still far off, along with that of wireless telegraphy, and almost an Utopian dream, so long as one holds strictly to the current conceptions of our positive sciences. But break these narrow limits; fly, for example, towards the illimitable horizon which spiritism opens up to its happy followers, and as soon as this vague hope takes shape, nothing seems to prevent its immediate

p. 141

realization; and the only cause for wonder is found in the fact that no privileged medium has yet arisen to have the glory, unique in the world, of being the first intermediary between ourselves and the human inhabitants of other planets; for spiritism takes no more account of the barrier of space than of time. The "gates of distance" are wide open before it. With it the question of means is a secondary matter; one has only the embarrassment of making a choice. It matters not whether it be by intuition, by clairvoyance, by telepathy, or by double personality that the soul is permitted to leave momentarily its terrestrial prison and make the voyage between this world and others in an instant of time, or whether the feat is accomplished by means of the astral body, by the reincarnation of disincarnate omnisciences, by "fluid beings," or, in a word, by any other process whatever. The essential point is, according to spiritism, that no serious objection would be offered to the possibility of such communication. The only difficulty would be to find a mediumistic subject possessing sufficient psychical faculties. It is a simple question of fact; if such a one has not yet been found, it is apparently only because the time is not yet ripe. But now that astronomers themselves appeal to those "unknown methods of actual science" to put us en rapport with other worlds, no doubt spiritism—which is the science of to-morrow, as definite as absolute religion—will soon respond to these legitimate aspirations. We may, therefore, expect at any moment the revelation so impatiently looked for, and every

p. 142

good medium has the right to ask herself whether she is not the being predestined to accomplish this unrivalled mission.

These are the considerations which, to my mind, in their essential content inspired in the subliminal part of Mlle. Smith the first idea of her Martian romance. I would not assert that the passages from M. Flammarion which I have quoted came directly to the notice of Hélène, but they express and recapitulate wonderfully well one of the elements of the atmosphere in which she found herself at the beginning of her mediumship. For if there are no certain indications of her ever having read any work on the "heavenly worlds" and their inhabitants, either that of M. Flammarion or of any other author, she has, nevertheless, heard such subjects discussed. She is perfectly familiar with the name of the celebrated astronomical writer Juvisy, and knows something of his philosophical ideas, which, by-the-way, is not at all surprising when we consider the popularity he enjoys among spiritists, who find in him a very strong scientific support for their doctrine of reincarnation on other planets.

I also have evidence that in the circle of Mme. N., of which Hélène was a member in 1892, the conversation more than once turned in the direction of the habitability of Mars, to which the discovery of the famous "canals" has for some years specially directed the attention of the general public. This circumstance appears to me to explain sufficiently the fact that Hélène's subliminal astronomy should be concerned with this planet. It is, moreover, quite

p. 143

possible that the first germs of the Martian romance date still further back than the beginning of Hélène's mediumship. The Oriental rôle shows indications of concerning itself with that planet, and the very clear impression which she has of having in her childhood and youth experienced many visions of a similar kind "without her noticing them particularly," gives rise to the supposition that the ingredients of which this cycle is composed date from many years back. Possibly they may have one and the same primitive source in the exotic memories, descriptions, or pictures of tropical countries which later branched out under the vigorous impulsion of spiritistic ideas in two distinct currents, the Hindoo romance on the one side and the Martian on the other, whose waters are mingled on more than one occasion afterwards.

While, on the whole, therefore, it is probable that its roots extend back as far as the childhood of Mlle. Smith, it is nevertheless with the Martian romance, as well as with the others, not a mere question of the simple cryptomnesiac return of facts of a remote past, or of an exhumation of fossil residua brought to light again by the aid of somnambulism. It is a very active process, and one in full course of evolution, nourished, undoubtedly, by elements belonging to the past, but which have been recombined and moulded in a very original fashion, until it amounts finally, among other things, to the creation of an unknown language. It will be interesting to follow step by step the phases of this elaboration: but since it always, unfortunately, hides itself in the obscurity of the subconsciousness, we are only cognizant of it by its occasional

p. 144

appearances, and all the rest of that subterranean work must be inferred, in a manner somewhat hypothetical, from those supraliminal eruptions and the scanty data which we have concerning the outward influences which have exerted a stimulating influence upon the subliminal part of Hélène. It was in 1892, then, that the conversations took place which were to prepare the soil for this work of lofty subliminal fantasy, and planted in Hélène's mind the double idea, of enormous scientific interest, that she could enter into direct relation with the inhabitants of Mars, and of the possibility, unsuspected by scientists, but which spiritism furnishes us, of reaching there by a mediumistic route. I doubt, however, whether that vague suggestion on the part of the environment would have sufficed to engender the Martian dream—since for more than two years no sign of its eruption mainfested itself—without the intervention of some fillip more concrete, capable of giving a start to the whole movement. It is not easy, unfortunately, for want of records of the facts, to assign with precision the circumstances under which and the moment when Hélène's subconscious imagination received that effective impulsion, but an unequivocal trace is discovered, as I am about to show in the contemporaneous report of the proceedings of the first distinctly Martian seance of Mlle. Smith.

In March, 1894, Hélène made the acquaintance of M. Lemaître, who, being exceedingly interested in the phenomena of abnormal psychology, was present with others at some of her seances, and finally begged her to hold some at his house. At the first of these

p. 145

[paragraph continues] (October 28, 1894), Hélène met a lady, a widow, who was greatly to be pitied. Besides suffering from a very serious affection of the eyes, Mme. Mirbel had been terribly afflicted by the loss of her only son, Alexis, seventeen years old, and a pupil of M. Lemaître. While not yet fully convinced of the truth of spiritism, it is easy to understand that Mme. Mirbel was very anxious to believe in that consolatory doctrine, and ready to accept it, if only some proofs could be furnished her; and what more convincing testimony could she ask or receive than that of a message from her beloved child? Moreover, it was probably not without a secret hope of procuring a communication of this nature that she accepted the invitation which M. Lemaître had sent her with the idea of procuring some moments of distraction for the unhappy mother As happens frequently in Hélène's case, this first seance fully satisfied the desires of the sitters and surpassed their expectations. Speaking only of that which concerns Mme. Mirbel, Hélène had the vision, first, of a young man, in the very detailed description of whom there was no difficulty in recognizing the deceased Alexis Mirbel; then of an old man whom the table called Raspail, brought by the young man that he might treat his mother's eyes, who thus had the double privilege of receiving through. the table words of tenderness from her son, and from Raspail directions for the treatment of the affection of her eyes. Nothing in that seance recalled in any way the planet Mars, and it could not be foreseen from anything that occurred there that Alexis Mirbel, disincarnated, would return

p. 146

later under the name of Esenale as official interpreter of the Martian language.

It was altogether different a month later (November 25), at the second reunion at M. Lemaître's, at which Mme. Mirbel was again present. On this occasion the astronomical dream appeared at once and dominated the entire seance.

From the beginning, says the report of the seance, Mlle. Smith perceived, in the distance and at a great height, a bright light. Then she felt a tremor which almost caused her heart to cease beating, after which it seemed to her as though her head were empty and as if she were no longer in the body. She found herself in a dense fog, which changed successively from blue to a vivid rose color, to gray, and then to black: she is floating, she says; and the table, supporting itself on one leg, seemed to express a very curious floating movement. Then she sees a star, growing larger, always larger. and becomes, finally, "as large as our house." Hélène feels that she is ascending; then the table gives, by raps: "Lemaître, that which you have so long desired!" Mlle. Smith, who had been ill at ease, finds herself feeling better; she distinguishes three enormous globes, one of them very beautiful. "On what am I walking?" she asks. And the table replies: "On a world—Mars." Hélène then began a description of all the strange things which presented themselves to her view, and caused her as much surprise as amusement. Carriages without horses or wheels, emitting sparks as they glided by; houses with fountains on the roof; a cradle having for curtains

p. 147

an angel made of iron with outstretched wings, etc. What seemed less strange, were people exactly like the inhabitants of our earth, save that both sexes wore the same costume, formed of trousers very ample, and a long blouse, drawn tight about the waist and decorated with various designs. The child in the cradle was exactly like our children, according to the sketch which Hélène made from memory after the seance.

Finally, she saw upon Mars a sort of vast assembly hall, in which was Professor Raspail, having in the first row of his hearers the young Alexis Mirbel, who, by a typtological dictation, reproached his mother for not having followed the medical prescription which he gave her a month previously: "Dear mamma, have you, then, so little confidence in us? You have no idea how much pain you have caused me!" Then followed a conversation of a private nature between Mme. Mirbel and her son, the latter replying by means of the table; then everything becomes quiet, the vision of Mars effaces itself little by little; the table takes the same rotary .movement on one foot which it had at the commencement of the seance; Mlle. Smith finds herself again in the fogs and goes through the same process as before in an inverse order. Then she exclaims: "Ah! here I am back again!" and several loud raps on the table mark the end of the seance.

I have related in its principal elements this first Martian seance, for the sake of its importance in different respects.

The initial series of cœnæsthetic hallucinations,

p. 148

corresponding to a voyage from the earth to Mars, reflects well the childish character of an imagination which scientific problems or the exigencies of logic trouble very little. Without doubt spiritism can explain how the material difficulties of an interplanetary journey may be avoided in a purely mediumistic, fluid connection; but why, then, this persistence of physical sensations, trouble with the heart, tremor, floating sensation, etc.? However it may be, this series of sensations is from this time on the customary prelude, and, as it were, the premonitory aura of the Martian dream, with certain modifications, throughout all the seances; sometimes it is complicated with auditive hallucinations (rumbling, noise of rushing water, etc.), or sometimes olfactory (disagreeable odors of burning, of sulphur, of a coming storm), oftener it tends to shorten and simplify itself, until it is either reduced to a brief feeling of malaise, or to the initial visual hallucination of the light, generally very brilliant and red, in which the Martian visions usually appear.

But the point to which I wish to call special attention is that singular speech of the table, on the instant at which Mlle. Smith arrives on the distant star, and before it is known what star is concerned: "Lemaître, that which you have so much wished for!" This declaration, which may be considered as a dedication, so to speak, inscribed on the frontispiece of the Martian romance, authorizes us, in my opinion, in considering it and interpreting it in its origin, as a direct answer to a wish of M. Lemaître, a desire which came at a recent period to

p. 149

[paragraph continues] Hélène's knowledge, and which has enacted with her the initiatory rôle of her astronomical dream.

It is true that M. Lemaître himself did not understand at the moment to what this preliminary warning referred, but the note which he inserted at the end of his report of that seance is instructive in this regard: "I do not know how to explain the first words dictated by the table: 'Lemaître, that which you have so much wished for!' M. S. reminds me that in a conversation which I had with him last summer I said to him: 'It would be very interesting to know what is happening upon other planets.' If this is an answer to the wish of last year, very well."

It must be added that M. S., who had been sufficiently struck by this wish of M. Lemaître to remember it for several months, was, during all of the time referred to, one of the most regular attendants upon the seances of Mlle. Smith; and, to one who knows by experience all that happens at the spiritistic reunions, before, after, and during the seance itself, there could hardly be any doubt but that it was through M. S., as intermediary, that Mlle. Smith had heard mentioned M. Lemaître's regret at our relative ignorance of the inhabitants of other planets. This idea, probably caught on the wing during the state of suggestibility which accompanies the seances, returned with renewed force when Hélène was invited to hold a seance at the house of M. Lemaître, and made more vivid also by the desire, which is always latent in her, of making the visions as interesting as possible to the persons among whom she finds herself. Such is, in my opinion, the seed which, falling into

p. 150

the ground and fertilized by former conversations concerning the inhabitants of Mars and the possibility of spiritistic relations with them, has served as the germ of the romance, the further development of which it remains for me to trace.

One point which still remains to be cleared up in the seance, as I come to sum up, is the singularly artificial character and the slight connection between the Martian vision, properly so called, and the reappearance of Raspail and Alexis Mirbel. We do not altogether understand what these personages have to do with it. What need is there of their being to-day found on the planet Mars simply for the purpose of continuing their interview with Mme. Mirbel, begun at a previous seance, without the intervention of any planet? The assembly-hall at which they are found, while it is located on Mars, is a bond of union all the more artificial between them and that planet in that there is nothing specifically Martian in its description and appears to have been borrowed from our globe. This incident is at bottom a matter out of the regular course, full of interest undoubtedly for Mme. Mirbel, whom it directly concerns, but without intimate connection with the Martian world. It was evidently the astronomical revelation, intended for M. Lemaître, and ripened by a period of incubation, which should have furnished the material for this seance; but the presence of Mme. Mirbel awoke anew the memory of her son and of Raspail, which had occupied the preceding seance, and these memories, interfering with the Martian vision, become, for good or ill, incorporated as a strange episode in it without having

p. 151

any direct connection with it. The work of unification, of dramatization, by which these two unequal chains of ideas are harmonized and fused the one with the other through the intermediation of an assembly-hall, is no more or no less extraordinary than that which displays itself in all our nocturnal phantasmagoria, where certain absolutely heterogeneous memories often ally themselves after an unexpected fashion, and afford opportunity for confusions of the most bizarre character.

But mediumistic communications differ from ordinary dreams in this—namely, the incoherence of the latter does not cause them to have any consequences. We are astonished and diverted for a moment as we reflect upon a dream. Sometimes a dream holds a little longer the attention of the psychologist, who endeavors to unravel the intricate plot of his dreams and to discover, amid the caprices of association or the events of the waking state, the origin of their tangled threads. But, on the whole, this incoherence has no influence on the ultimate course of our thoughts, because we see in our dreams only the results of chance, without value in themselves and without objective signification.

It is otherwise with spiritistic communications, by reason of the importance and the credit accorded them.

The medium who partially recollects her automatisms, or to whom the sitters have detailed them after the close of the seance, adding also their comments, becomes preoccupied with these mysterious revelations; like the paranoiac, who perceives hidden meanings

p. 152

or a profound significance in the most trifling coincidences, she seeks to fathom the content of her strange visions, reflects on them, examines them in the light of spiritistic notions; if she encounters difficulties in them, or contradictions, her conscious or unconscious thought (the two are not always in accord) will undertake the task of removing them, and solving as well as possible the problems which these dream-creations, considered as realities, impose upon her, and the later somnambulisms will bear the imprint of this labor of interpretation or correction.

It is to this point we have come at the commencement of the astronomical romance of Mlle. Smith. The purely accidental and fortuitous conjunction of the planet Mars and Alexis Mirbel in the seance of the 25th of November determined their definitive welding together. Association by fortuitous contiguity is transformed into a logical connection.

II. LATER DEVELOPMENT OF THE MARTIAN CYCLE
This development was not effected in a regular manner; but for the most part by leaps and bounds, separating stoppages more or less prolonged. After its inauguration in the seance of November 25, 1894, it suffered a first eclipse of nearly fifteen months, attributable to new preoccupations which had installed themselves on the highest plane of Mlle. Smith's subconsciousness and held that position throughout the whole of the year 1895.

Compared with the seance of November, 1894, that

p. 153

of February, 1896 (of which a résumé follows), shows interesting innovations. Raspail does not figure in it and henceforth does not appear again, which was probably due to the fact that Mme. Mirbel had failed to make use of the method of treatment which he had prescribed for her eyes. Young Mirbel, on the contrary, sole object of the desires and longings of his poor mother, occupies the highest plane, and is the central figure of the vision. He now speaks Martian and no longer understands French, which complicates the conversation somewhat. Further, not possessing the power of moving tables upon our globe, it is through the intervention of the medium, by incarnating himself momentarily in Mlle. Smith, that he henceforth communicates with his mother. These two latter points in their turn cause certain difficulties to arise, which, acting as a ferment or a suggestion, will later usher in a new step in the progress of the romance: Alexis Mirbel cannot return to incarnate himself in a terrestrial medium if he is imprisoned in his Martian existence; he must first terminate that and return to the condition in which he again floats in interplanetary space; which "fluid" or wandering state permits him at the same time to give us the French translation of the Martian tongue; since, according to spiritism, a complete memory of previous existences, and consequently of the various languages pertaining to them, is temporarily recovered during the phases of disincarnation.

These anticipatory hints will assist the reader in following more easily the thread of the somnambulistic romance in the résumé of its principal stages.

p. 154

February 2, 1896.—I sum up, by enumerating them, the principal somnambulistic phases of this seance, which lasted more than two hours and a half, and at which Mme. Mirbel assisted.

I. Increasing hemisomnambulism, with gradual loss of consciousness of the real environment—at the beginning the table bows several times to Mme. Mirbel, announcing that the coming scene is intended for her. After a series of elementary visual hallucinations (rainbow colors, etc.), meaning for Mme. Mirbel that she would finally become blind, Hélène arose, left the table, and held a long conversation with an imaginary woman who wished her to enter a curious little car without wheels or horses. She became impatient towards this woman, who, after having at first spoken to her in French, now persisted in speaking in an unintelligible tongue, like Chinese. Leopold revealed to us by the little finger that it was the language of the planet Mars, that this woman is the mother of Alexis Mirbel, reincarnated on that planet, and that Hélène herself will speak Martian. Presently Hélène begins to recite with increasing volubility an incomprehensible jargon, the beginning of which is as follows (according to notes taken by M. Lemaître at the time, as accurately as possible): "Mitchma mitchmon mimini tchouainem mimatchineg masichinof mézavi patelki abrésinad navette naven navette mitchichénid naken chinoutoufiche" . . . From this point the rapidity prevented the recognition of anything else, except such scraps as "téké. . . katéchivist. . . méguetch," . . . or "méketch . . . kété . . . chiméké." After a few minutes,

p. 155

[paragraph continues] Hélène interrupts herself, crying out, "Oh, I have had enough of it; you say such words to me I will never be able to repeat them." Then, with some reluctance, she consents to follow her interlocutrix into the car which was to carry her to Mars.

2. The trance is now complete. Hélène thereupon mimics the voyage to Mars in three phases, the meaning of which is indicated by Leopold: a regular rocking motion of the upper part of the body (passing through the terrestrial atmosphere), absolute immobility and rigidity (interplanetary space), again oscillations of the shoulders and the bust (atmosphere of Mars). Arrived upon Mars, she descends from the car, and performs a complicated pantomime expressing the manners of Martian politeness: uncouth gestures with the hands and fingers, slapping of the hands, taps of the fingers upon the nose, the lips, the chin, etc., twisted courtesies, glidings, and rotation on the floor, etc. It seems that is the way people approach and salute each other up there.

3. This sort of dance having suggested to one of the sitters the idea of performing upon the piano, Hélène suddenly fell upon the floor in an evidently hypnotic state, which had no longer a Martian character. At the cessation of the music she entered into a mixed state, in which the memory of the Martian visions continually mingle themselves with some idea of her terrestrial existence. She talks to herself. "Those dreams are droll, all the same. . . . I must tell that to M. Lemaître. When he [the Martian Alexis Mirbel] said 'Good-day' to me, he tapped himself upon the nose. . . . He spoke to me in a

p. 156

queer language, but I understood it perfectly, all the same," etc. Seated on the ground, leaning against a piece of furniture, she continues, soliloquizing in French, in a low voice, to review the dream, mingling with it some wandering reflections. She finds, for example, that the young Martian (Alexis) was a remarkably big boy for one only five or six years old, as he claimed to be, and that the woman seemed very young to be his mother.

4. After a transitory phase of sighs and hiccoughs, followed by profound sleep with muscular relaxation, she enters into Martian somnambulism and murmurs some confused words: "Késin ouitidjé" . . . etc. I command her to speak French to me; she seems to understand, and replies in Martian, with an irritated and imperious tone, I ask her to tell me her name; she replies, "Vasimini Météche." With the idea that, perhaps, she "is incarnating" the young Alexis, of whom she has spoken so much in the preceding phase, I urge Mme. Mirbel to approach her, and thereupon begins a scene of incarnation really very affecting; Mme. Mirbel is on her knees, sobbing bitterly, in the presence of her recovered son, who shows her marks of the most profound affection and caresses her hands "exactly as he was accustomed to do during his last illness," all the time carrying on a discourse in Martian (tin is toutch), which the poor mother cannot understand, but to which an accent of extreme sweetness and a tender intonation impart an evident meaning of words of consolation and filial tenderness. This pathetic duet lasted about ten minutes,

p. 157

and was brought to an end by a return to lethargic sleep, from which Hélène awakened at the end of a quarter of an hour, pronouncing a short Martian word, after which she instantly recovered the use of her French and her normal waking state.

5. Questioned as to what had passed, Hélène, while drinking tea, narrates the dream which she has had. She has a sufficiently clear memory of her journey and of what she has seen on Mars, with the exception of the young man, of whom she has retained only a recollection of the scene of incarnation.

But suddenly, in the midst of the conversation, she begins to speak in Martian, without appearing to be aware of it, and while continuing to chat with us in the most natural manner; she appeared to understand all our words, and answered in her strange idiom, in the most normal tone, and seemed very much astonished when we told her that we did not understand her language; she evidently believes she is speaking French. * By questioning her concerning a visit which she had made a few days before to M. C., and asking her the number and the names of the persons whom she met there, we succeed in identifying the four following Martian words: Métiche S., Monsieur S.; Médache C., Madame C.; Métaganiche Smith, Mademoiselle Smith; kin’t’che, four. After which she resumes definitively her French. Interrogated as to the incident

p. 158

which has transpired, she is astounded, has only a hesitating and confused memory of her having spoken at all this evening of her visit to M. C., and does not recognize nor understand the four Martian words given above when they are repeated to her. On several occasions during this seance I had made the suggestion to Hélène that at a given signal, after her awaking, she would recover the memory of the Martian words pronounced by her and of their meaning. But Leopold, who was present, declared that this command would not be obeyed, and that a translation could not be obtained this evening. The signal, though often repeated, was, in fact, without result.

It has seemed to me necessary to describe with some detail this seance, at which the Martian language made its first appearance, in order to place before the reader all the fragments which, we have been able to gather, without, of course, any guarantee of absolute accuracy, since every one knows how difficult it is to note the sounds of unknown words. A curious difference is to be noticed between the words picked up in the course of the seance and the four words several times repeated by Hélène, the meaning and pronunciation of which have been determined with complete accuracy in the posthypnotic return of the somnambulistic dream. Judged by these latter, the Martian language is only a puerile counterfeit of French, of which she preserves in each word a number of syllables and certain conspicuous letters. In the other phrases, on the contrary, also making use of later texts which have been translated, as

p. 159

we shall see hereafter, it cannot be discovered what it is. We are constrained to believe that these first outbreaks of Martian, characterized by a volubility which we have rarely met with since then, was only a pseudo-Martian, a continuation of sounds uttered at random and without any real meaning, analogous to the gibberish which children use sometimes in their games of "pretending" to speak Chinese or Indian, and that the real Martian was only created by an unskilful distortion of French, in a posthypnotic access of hemisomnambulism, in order to respond to the manifest desire of the sitters to obtain the precise significance of some isolated Martian words.

The impossibility, announced by Leopold, of procuring a translation that same evening of the pretended Martian spoken for the first time during that seance, and the fact that it could not again be obtained, give some support to the preceding theory.

The circumstance that Hélène, in remembering her dream in phase No. 3, had the sentiment of having well understood this unknown jargon, is not an objection, since the children who amuse themselves by simulating an uncouth idiom—to recur to that example—do not retain the least consciousness of the ideas which their gibberish is assumed to express. It seems, in short, that if this new language was already really established at that time in Hélène's subliminal consciousness to the point of sustaining fluently discourses of several minutes’ duration, some phrases at least would not have failed to gush forth, spontaneously sometimes, in the course of ordinary

p. 160

life, and in order to throw light upon visions of Martian people or landscapes. More than seven months had to elapse before that phenomenon, which was so frequent afterwards, began to appear.

May we not see in this half-year a period of incubation, employed in the subliminal fabrication of a language, properly so called—that is to say, formed of precise words and with a definite signification, in imitation of the four terms just referred to—to replace the disordered nonsense of the beginning?

However it may be, and to return to our story, one can imagine the interest which that sudden and unexpected apparition of mysterious speech aroused, and which the authority of Leopold would not allow to be taken for anything other than the language of Mars. The natural curiosity of Hélène herself, as well as that of her friends, to know more about our neighbors of other worlds and their way of expressing themselves should naturally have contributed to the development of the subliminal dream. The following seance, unhappily, did not justify the promise with which it began.

February 16, 1896.—"At the beginning of this seance, Hélène has a vision of Alexis Mirbel, who announces, by means of the table, that he has not forgotten his French, and that he will give a translation of the Martian words another day. But this prediction is not fulfilled. Whether Hélène, for the reason that she is not feeling well to-day, or that the presence of some one antipathetic to her has hindered the production of the phenomena, the Martian somnambulism, which seemed on the point of breaking

p. 161

forth, did not make its appearance. Hélène remains in a crepuscular state, in which the feeling of present reality and the Martian ideas on the level of consciousness interfere with and mutually obscure each other.. She speaks in French with the sitters, but mingling with it here and there a strange word (such as méche, chinit, chéque, which, according to the context, seem to signify pencil, ring, paper), and appears far away from her actual surroundings. She is astonished, in particular, at the sight of M. R. occupied in taking notes by the procès verbal, and seems to find that manner of writing with a pen or pencil strange and absurd, but without explaining clearly how it was to be otherwise accomplished. The importance of this seance is in the fact that the idea stands out clearly (which was not to be realized until a year and a half later) of a mode of handwriting peculiar to the planet Mars."

This seance, which was almost a failure, was the last of that period. Hélène's health, which became more and more impaired by standing too long on her feet and overwork at her desk, necessitated her taking a complete rest. I have mentioned the fact that during these six months, without any regular seances, she was subject to a superabundance of spontaneous visions and somnambulisms; but these automatisms belonged to the Hindoo or other cycles, and I do not believe that she experienced during that time any phenomena which were clearly related to the Martian romance. On the other hand, as soon as she was re-established in and had returned to her normal mode of life, the latter appeared again with

p. 162

all the more intensity, dating from the following nocturnal vision. (See Fig. 9.)

September 5, 1896.—Hélène narrates that having arisen at a quarter-past three in the morning to take in some flowers that stood upon the window-sill and were threatened by the wind, instead of going back to bed immediately she sat down upon her bed and saw before her a landscape and some peculiar people. She was on the border of a beautiful blue-pink lake, with a bridge the sides of which were transparent and formed of yellow tubes like the pipes of an organ, of which one end seemed to be plunged into the water. The earth was peach-colored; some of the trees had trunks widening as they ascended, while those of others were twisted. Later a crowd approached the bridge, in which one woman was especially prominent. The women wore hats which were flat, like plates. Hélène does not know who these people are, but has the feeling of having conversed with them. On the bridge there was a man of dark complexion (Astané), carrying in his hands an instrument somewhat resembling a carriage-lantern in appearance, which, being pressed, emitted flames, and which seemed to be a flying-machine. By means of this instrument the man left the bridge, touched the surface of the water, and returned again to the bridge. This tableau lasted twenty-five minutes, since Hélène, upon returning to consciousness, observed that her candle was still burning and ascertained that it was then 3.40 o'clock. She is convinced that she did not fall asleep, but was wide awake during all of this vision. (See Figs. 10 and 11.)

p. 163

From that time the spontaneous Martian visions are repeated and multiplied. Mlle. Smith experiences them usually in the morning, after awaking and before rising from her bed; sometimes in the evening, or occasionally at other times during the day. It is in the course of these visual hallucinations that the Martian language appears again under an auditive form.

September 22, 1896.—During these last days Hélène has seen again on different occasions the Martian man, with or without his flying-machine; for example, he appeared to her while she was taking a bath, at the edge of the bath-tub. She has had several times visions of a strange house the picture of which followed her with so much persistency that she finally painted it (see Fig. 12). At the same time she heard on three different occasions a sentence the meaning of which she does not know, but which she was able to take down with her pencil as follows: "Dodé né ci haudan té méche métiche Astané ké dé mé véche." (As was ascertained six weeks after, by the translation given in the seance of the 2d of November, this phrase indicates that the strange house is that of the Martian man, who is called Astané.)

This phrase was undoubtedly Martian, but what was the meaning of it? After having hoped in vain for nearly a month that the meaning would be revealed in some way or other, I decided to try a disguised suggestion. I wrote to Leopold himself a letter, in which I appealed to his omniscience as well as to his kindness to give me some enlightenment in regard to the strange language which piqued our

p. 164

curiosity, and, in particular, as to the meaning of the phrase Hélène had heard. I asked him to answer me in writing, by means of Hélène's hand. We did not have to wait long for a reply. Hélène received my letter the 20th of October, and on the evening of the 22d, seized with a vague desire to write, she took a pencil, which placed itself in the regular position, between the thumb and the index-finger (whereas she always held her pen between the middle and index-finger), and traced rapidly, in the characteristic handwriting of Leopold and with his signature, a beautiful epistle of eighteen Alexandrine lines addressed to me, of which the ten last are as follows, being an answer to my request that the secrets of Martian be revealed to me:
I was working in the studio of Artan Gro when I heard a great laugh behind me. If ever there was derision in a laugh, there was derision in this one. I flung down my gaudy brushes and my palette and turned about in a rage—to find the master himself, his red cave of a mouth wide open in his black beard. I cooled my temper with an effort; for great indeed is Artan Gro, master artist of Sub Atlan.

"I am sorry, Mutan Mion," he gasped, "but I can't control my laughter. No one ever has conceived, much less executed, anything worse than what you have put upon canvas! What do you call it, 'Proteus in a Convulsive Nightmare'?"

But Artan Gro could control himself, I was sure. It is one of the things I have learned of the really great in the arts; they make no pretenses. He was laughing because he wanted to tell me frankly what he thought of my ability as an artist. It is bad enough when your friends mock your work (and they had), but when the master is convulsed with laughter it is high time to wake up to the truth.

"It is true, great Artan Gro," I said humbly. "I want to paint but I cannot. I haven't the ability."

Artan Gro's expression softened. He smiled, and as he smiled it was as though he had turned on the sunlight.

"Go," he said, "go; to the deeper caverns at Mu's center. Once there study science; learn to mix the potions

p. 8

that give the brain greater awareness, a better rate of growth." He patted my shoulder and added a last bit of advice. "Once you have mixed the potions, take them. Drink them—and grow!" He passed on, still chuckling.

Why is the truth always so brutal? Or does it just seem brutal when it comes from those wiser than you? I slunk from the studio; but I had already determined to take his advice. I would go to Tean City, at Mu's center. I would go to the science schools of the Titans.

Never before had I considered leaving Sub Atlan, my birthplace, or as I should express it, my growth place, for I am a culture man, a product of the laboratories. In fact, I remember no other place on Mu, although it is a fact that during the process of my development to culture manhood,

I roamed the culture forests of Atlantis, 2 which is the name for Surface Atlan. Sub Atlan is just below Atlantis, while Tean City is located at the center of Mu, at a great depth below Sub Atlan. The walls of the great cavern in which Tean City is located are hardened to untellable strength by treatment with ray-flows which feed its growth until it is of great density. There are many other cities which grew

p. 9

through the centuries to vast size, but none so great as Tean City. Some are abandoned, but all are indestructible; their cavern walls too dense to penetrate or to collapse.

Since Tean City is located near the center of Mother Mu, gravity neutralizes itself by opposition. It is very comfortable. Many of the Titans live there, and in fact, it is almost a Titan city. There also are the mighty ones, the Elders of the Atlan race's government. Huge they are, like great trees, many centuries old and still growing. I had long wished to see them, and now that I had decided to go, the thrill was greater than any I had ever experienced, I was going down into the city of many wonders!

Out on the street I took one of the many vehicles that are provided for travel about the city. These vehicles, their weight reduced by a gravity deflection device, are powered by motors whose energy is derived from a gravity focusing magnetic field, by which one side of a flywheel becomes much heavier than the other. This is accomplished by bending gravity fall 3 in the same way that a lens bends a light ray.

The topless 4 buildings of Sub Atlan fled by me; and soon I neared the squat entrance to the shafts that fell

p. 10

from Sub Atlan to Center Mu, to Tean City, home of the Titans. 5 I knew that swift elevators dropped down these shafts; but I had never traveled in one of them.

Because I knew the control-man of one of the elevators, having talked with him often of Tean City and the wonders he had seen in it, I went to his shaft for my descent. He was glad to see me, and very much surprised to learn that I was going to Tean City.

"You will never regret it!" he declared.

The car dropped sickeningly, so swiftly that a great fear grew in me that I would be crushed by deceleration when we finally stopped. In panic I watched an indicator's two hands move slowly toward each other as though to cover its face in shame. Then, with little sensation, the

p. 11

car stopped. Here at the center of Mu I had become nearly weightless and the ceasing of even such swift motion did not have ill effects upon my weightless body. I knew that I would not have that fear again.

Two fat Atlans stepped out of the car ahead of me, sighing with relief at their renewed weightlessness, which they had obviously been anticipating. As I was about to follow them from the car, the control-man drew me aside.

"Fear rides the ways down here," he whispered, his sharp-pointed, cat-like ears quivering an alert. "Fear is a smell down here that is ever in the nose—a bad smell, too. Try to figure it out while you are down here; and tell me, too, if you get an answer."

I did not understand what he meant, but I promised anyway. The smell of fear, in Tean City?

Immediately I was immersed in the sensually shocking appeal of a variform crowd, mostly at this hour, a shopping rush of female variforms. While there were many of my own type, and of the elevator control-man's type, there were a greater number of creatures of every shape the mind could grasp and some that it could not. All were citizens; all were animate and intelligent—hybrids of every race that space crossing had ever brought into contact, from planets whose very names are now lost in time. The technicons may have been wrong in the opinion of some when they developed variform breeding; but they have certainly given life variety. I had never seen so many variforms 6 before.

At a corner of the vastly vaulted way where many

p. 12

rollat platforms 7 crossed and recrossed each other, I stepped to a telescreen and dialed the student center. The image of a tremendous six-armed Sybyl female filled the screen and the electrically augmented body appeal of the mighty life within her seized the youth in me and wrung it as no embrace from lesser female ever had.

"And what" her voice shook me as a leaf in an organ pipe "might a pale and puny male like you want in Tean City? You look as if you never had enough to eat, as if love had passed you by. Did you come down here because no one wanted you elsewhere?"

I grinned self-consciously back at her image, my voice a feeble piping in comparison to hers.

"I have come to learn something beside drawing lines around dreams. I am a painter from the subsurface who has decided that knowledge of actual growth is more important than the false growth of an untrue image upon a canvas." I wondered what the master would have said to hear me.

"You are right," she boomed back, her six arms engaged in complex wand mysterious movements, picking up and laying down instruments and tools in bewildering rapidity, her attention elsewhere yet enough remaining on me to hold me bound in an attraction as strong as a towing cable. She was a forty foot Titan, her age unknowable. As I thought upon this and tried not to think of the immense beauty and life force of her, I suddenly realized she was hiding fear. I have a peculiar faculty for sensing hidden emotions. That bluff greeting had been a hidden wish to drive me from some danger. But I did not speak of it, for I read that caution in her; a very strong mental flow that fairly screamed DON'T.

This kind of fear was a wonder and a new thing to me, for danger was a thing long banished from our life. Then she spoke, reluctantly it seemed.

"Go to the center of the Hall of Symbols. There you

p. 13

can ask a student or an instructor who will tell you all you need to know."

The grip of the woman life in her left my mind and she was gone from my vision. As I turned from the telescreen my mind insisted on visualizing that six-armed embrace and its probable effect upon a man in love. I shivered in spite of the warmth, but not from fear. The blood of the Titans was alive, I thought; strangely and wonderfully alive!

I stepped into a rollat at the curb, inspected the directory, then inserted a coin and dialed the number of the building that housed the Hall of Symbols. I leaned back while the automatic drive of the rollat directed the car through the speeding traffic, its electric eye more efficient than my own.

Yes, much more efficient than my own at the moment, which were wandering over the figure of a variform female on the walk whose upper part was the perfect torso of a woman and whose lower part was a sinuously gliding thirty feet of brilliantly mottled snake. You could never have escaped her embrace of your own will once she had wrapped those life-generating coils around you!

I thought upon it. The gen of these variforms was certainly more vital; possibly because the Titan technicons Who lived here kept the people healthier. Perhaps the hybrids were naturally more fecund of micro-spore. It had indeed been a day of brainstorms, I mused, when some old technicon had realized that not only would a strong integrative field with a rich exd 8 supply cause all matter to grow at an increased rate, but would also cause even the most dissimilar life-gens to unite. It has been the realization that had resulted in various form life. Most of the crosses by this method had resulted in an increased strength and

p. 14

fertility. They now were more numerous than four-limbed men, and often superior in mental ability.

Automatically my mind associated the embrace of the snake woman with the six arms of the giant Sybyl of Info; and I decided that I understood why Artan Gro had driven me here with his scorn. If I didn't learn about life here I never would anywhere. That had been what he had reasoned.

Soon I was striding between the pillaring fangs of the great beast's mouth that was the door of the Hall of Symbols where the school ways converged. About was the bustle attendant to any rollat way station; bearers rushing; travelers gazing about lost in wonder at the vaulting glitter of sculptured pillars and painted walls, done by men of a calibre whose work ro 9 like myself cannot grasp entirely.

Paintings and sculpture here hammered into the brain a message of the richness of life that immense mutual effort can give the lift unit, the pro. This richness of life was pictured in a terrible clash with evil, its opposite. 10 The hot fecundity of life and health growth was a sensuous blow

p. 15

upon the eyes, the soul leaped to take a hand and make life yet more worthwhile. I could not cease gazing at the leaping vault of pictured busy figures whose movements culminated in that offer to the spirit of man to join them in moulding life to a fit shape.

My rapt study of the paintings was interrupted by the sound of a pair of hooves that clicked daintily to a stop beside me. I glanced at the newcomer, who had stopped to stare up at the paintings also in that curious way that people have when they see another craning his neck—and my glance became a stare.

What was the use of aspiring to be an artist, my reason said, if those great masters who had placed that mighty picture book on the vaulting walls above were so easily outdone by the life force itself!

She was but a girl, younger than myself, but what a girl! Her body was encased in a transparent glitter; her skin a rosy pale purple; her legs, mottled with white, ended in a pair of cloven hooves. And as my brain struggled to grasp her colorful young perfection—she wagged her tail!

It was all too much. Speculating about the life-generating force possible in the variform creatures was one thing; but having it materialize beside you was another thing entirely. Such a beautiful tail it was. Of the softest, most beautiful fur.

"What were you staring at?" she asked. "The paintings?"

I stuttered, then answered. "The paintings . . . I guess . . . yes, the paintings. I'm a . . . painter . . . was a painter . . ." I gave up. I couldn't talk, I had to look.

"They are marvelous, aren't they," she declared enthusiastically. "I always look at them when I come down to the school. I am studying medicine. Now take that painting up there—"

On her arm and breast I saw the medical school insignia;

p. 16

a man's figure struggling with a great snake, disease. 11 It took brains to study medicine. This exquisite young thing, so full of gen force, so powerfully attractive, was smart too. And almost instantly she proved herself to be extremely friendly and companionable. She went on talking, describing, theorizing in a gush of amiable conversation that left me dizzy, gasping, and admiringly breathless. She told me everything about the paintings, the statues.

And before I realized it, we were walking on together. She was full of all sorts of information, and it seemed she had taken it upon herself to be my guide, to teach me the meaning of everything we saw. Her cheerful chatter soon told me all about herself, her studies, the schools, the great doors that led to each one from the central gathering place of the school rollat ways.

The Hall was justly famous for these doors. Before us now was the door to the medical school, formed of pillaring figures struggling with the coils of snakes. Next to it was the marine school door, formed of a crab whose huge claws met to form the arch. A planetron, a pendulum device to tell of the nearness of bodies in space, formed the entrance to the school of space navigation. All the ages of science of immortal growth had combined here in the symbols that formed the many doors.

From the moment that I pocketed a disc that bore the faun-legged girl's name and address, I was no longer an aspiring artist; I wanted to know what she knew, wanted to learn what she was learning.

Arl was her name, a short, sweet name for a girl and hard to forget, too. You can't forget a girl who wags her tail at you just like that.

And so she took me into the medical school and directed me to her own teacher. I became a member of the class immediately and discovered that I had entered upon the opening discourse.

The class was dominated by the immense presence of the teacher, a son of the Titans, bearded and horned, expounding in the exact syllogism of the technicon training. As he spoke, I became certain that this dynamo of human force should soon charge such a small battery as myself with everything in the way of knowledge I could assimilate.

There was only one slight disturbing factor. Just as I had sensed a strange, deeply buried and secret fear in the Sybyl, I knew that in the mind of this great son of the Titans there was a gnawing something that a part of his brain dwelt on continually. Fear was a smell that was ever in the nose down here in Tean City. The realization disturbed me so much that I failed to absorb a portion of the teacher's discourse. My absorption must have caught his attention, too, for I saw him staring disapprovingly at me. With a start, I re-concentrated my mind on what he was saying.

". . . a great cold ball hung in space. Once it had

p. 18

been a mighty, living planet, swinging ponderously around a dying sun that it had never seen, being covered with clouds. Then that sun had gone out, and the deadly ter 12 stiffened the surface life into glittering death.

"The planet's forests, which had lived in dense, dripping fog, had, in their many ages of life, deposited coal beds untold miles in depth—clear down to the stony core of the planet. No fire had ever touched these forests, because the dense fog had never allowed fire to burn.

"Venus, our nearest neighbor in space, is such a planet now, although much smaller. As it is on Venus, so it was on the unknown planet.

"Hanging in space the dead immensity of this ball was largely potential heat, for its tremendously thick shell was mostly pure carbon.

"Such once was the sun, your sun and mine; the sun of which Mu is a daughter.

"Then a blazing meteor, spewed violently from some sun in space, came flaming toward this cold ball. Deep it plunged into the beds of carbon. The fire spread swiftly—an ever-fire of disintegrance, not the passing-fire of combustion—and our sun was born into live-giving flame!

"A carbon fire is a clean fire and contains no dense metals like radium, titanium, uranium, polonium—whose emanations in disintegrance in suns cause old age and death because minute particles given off accumulate and convey the ever-fire into the body, there to kill it in time.

"Then sun heat was clean, and life sprang furiously into being on its daughter, Mu's surface. Nor did this life die—death came only by being eaten. Then life suffered old age not at all, for there was no cause."

The voice of the teacher paused a moment, and now indeed I knew that there was much for me to learn. Here was something that struck deep into me with an instantly

p. 19

vital interest. Most provoking of all was his peculiar emphasis on the word "then." I could not help the question that sprang to my lips.

"Why do you say 'Then life suffered old age not at all, for there was no cause.'? Is there cause now?"

It was as though I had placed a torch beneath the hidden fear in the Titan's eyes, for it flamed forth suddenly for all to see; but it was as quickly quelled. All in the class looked at me with that shocked expression which plainly said I had overstepped my bounds; but in the eyes of Arl I thought I saw the gleam of approval, and I found a dam to hold back my ebbing courage.

The teacher looked at me, and I saw kindliness in his eyes.

"You are new here, Mutan Mion. Therefore it is easy to understand that you have not heard of the projected migration of all Atlans to a new world under a beneficial sun. . .

"Yes, young ro, there is cause." He was answering my question with determination now, but he was not speaking to me alone; he was making his answer a part of his discourse. "I have spoken of the carbon fire as a clean fire. By this I mean that the atoms of carbon, when disintegrated, send forth the beneficial energy ash called exd which can be assimilated by our bodies and used to promote life-growth. However, the source of this ash is not carbon alone, but all other elements excepting the heavy metals such as I mentioned before. It is when these heavy elements begin to disintegrate in the ever-fire that we come to the cause of age.

"The particles of radium and other radioactive metals are the poison that causes the aging of tissue. These particles are thrown out by all old suns whose shell of carbon has been partly or altogether burned away, permitting the disintegrating fire to reach and seize upon the heavy metals at the sun's core. Our sun has begun to

p. 20

throw out great masses of these poisonous particles. They fall upon Mu in a continual flood, entering into living tissue and infecting it with the radioactive disease we call age.

"Through the years, the centuries, these poisons accumulate in the soil of the planet, and are continually being washed out of it by the rains with the result that all the water on Mu is becoming increasingly contaminated. When these waters are drunk, the poisons accumulate in the body, finally becoming numerous enough to completely halt all growth and still worse, to prevent any effectual use of exd, which is the food of all integration.

"The technicons, of course, have devised means to protect us from the accumulation of the age poisons, but it has become evident that their efforts are not entirely foolproof. We have discovered that we are living on a world that circles a sun that is growing old and is therefore deadly. We are living in the shadow of death, a shadow that will grow greater as the years pass until finally death with strike us all. We would, if we remained, not even begin to live out our lives. Centuries and centuries would be lost to us, and ultimately we might not even attain the initial growth of maturity!"

I ventured another question.

"What methods have the technicons devised?"

"They are simple ones. Multiple distillation of the water in which we drink and bathe; treatment of the water in a centrifuge to remove the very finely divided age poisons that cannot be removed by distillation; ben generators to create a magnetic field of ben energies; air centrifuges to remove poisons from the air. But I must impress upon you that it is impossible to shield us from all of the age poison; from that small amount that actually falls upon our own bodies and accumulates there as it does in the water. Eventually, if we remain on Mu, we will grow old, 13 and finally die."

p. 21

I looked him squarely in the eyes, respectful in a degree equal to the kindly interest that shone in his as he returned my look.

"It is not the age poisons you fear," I accused.

He looked at me silently; and a flood of force seemed to flow through me, encouraging me, protecting me, cautioning

p. 22

me. It was the same feeling I had gotten from the Sybyl.

"Come, students," he said gently. "We will go now to the embryo laboratory."

Before we entered the laboratory we were given nutrient potions prescribed by the Titan for his students to make them more receptive and hence his work easier. We were told that we would receive these potions regularly. Even as I took the first draught my brain throbbed with a new growth of ideas and strange new images. I was exhilarated beyond all imagining, and my enthusiasm knew no bounds. I took Arl's hand in mine as we trooped into the laboratory.

It was truly a wonderful place, the most amazing I had ever seen. I felt like a mite admitted to the treasure-house of a giant. Here were things that were beyond my intelligence to create of my own mind power; and yet I was being given free and welcome access to all of them, to learn from them, and to use the knowledge if I wished in my future life and work.

Many strange machines filled the laboratory, all performing tasks that I could only guess at. But these machines were subordinate to the real science of this great room, being designed only to chemically and electronically nourish and develop the many human embryos that moved and grew in synthetically duplicated mother-blood in sealed bottles.

The older ones kicked and tugged healthily at the grafted umbilical tube which supplied the life fluid—called

p. 23

[paragraph continues] Icor, the "blood of the gods." And it was this blood that was the subject of the lecture the Titan now gave us.

He told us of the upkeep and preparation of this fluid, both in the embryo and the adult; the difficult and important part being (he now stressed his words with greater emphasis with his attention bent especially toward me) the process of detecting and removing the slightest trace of the radio-active poisons that cause age.

I studied and I learned! These were the processes which had given the planet Mu its health and enabled us to live under more aging suns than other races. These were the life methods that had given us our fecundity; which had populated space for thousands of centuries with the seed of Atlan. I wanted to know all there was to learn about them.

The Titan, an old master at this most basic process of Atlan life, had imbued me with an enthusiasm for the true creation of life in its infinite possibilities of growth—such as no mere painter ever had. The delicate handling of those ultra-minute products of disintegrance from which primary integrations are formed; the mixing of these integrations into the atoms of elements; the chemistry of combining these atoms into the molecules of the substances used in the manufacture of the synthetic blood, Icor—all these steps were sheer artistry, yet were made as simple as child thought by the genius of the Titan.

Once more the Titan commented on the proposed emigration from Mu, weaving it into his lecture. There seemed to me to be an undercurrent of double meaning in his motive for repeating it; a double meaning that I strove to associate mentally with the fear-thing that was something else and also something so secret it must not be mentioned. It was as though even the fact that there was fear of that "something" must be kept secret. Our aging sun (he said) threw off increasingly large amounts of these sun's seeds, small but dense and active

p. 24

disintegrative particles, and I learned that keeping Atlan's peoples young was an increasingly difficult job for the technicons. I learned that the coordinators and rodite 14 were preparing the plans and ships for our migration to a young, new-born sun, where the force setup of life conditions left a greater margin of exd for intake of power, where integrance went on at a faster pace, and where the infection that caused the occasional trouble with detrimental energy robotism or detrimental err 15 in the human did not occur.

W hen the lecture in the embryo laboratory was finished we filed back to the classroom, and there the Titan flipped the switch that controlled the teleyes that supplied the

p. 25

home telesets of many with the course. We had not been dismissed, and I could see from the puzzled looks on the faces of the other students that this was not in accordance with the regular schedule.

For a long moment the Titan looked at us, and especially at me. Then he spoke:

"Today things have been said and seen and discussed in this class that had no direct bearing on the course you came here to take. You, Mutan Mion, have been the most brash—" my face grew red, and he hastened to add, "No, Mutan, I do not mean that you have been too forward; I meant brash in the sense that you have exposed yourself to a greater danger than that of my wrath." His eyes twinkled at the word wrath, and I knew that such would never be much of a danger! "I meant the menace that has caused the fear you have somehow seen in me. Perhaps you have sensed this in other places in Tean City, among others of the Titans; so it must be, for you to have been so certain of it as to challenge me.

"Yes, there was, and is, fear in me. And it is a fear that we all try to keep secret because those of us who show fear also show suspicion if not knowledge, and either has been equivalent to the signing of a death warrant. There are spying rays on us . . . at the moment we are screened . . . that seek out our knowledge and destroy us before we can coordinate it into an effective counteraction to the thing that is going on; to the thing we fear."

"What is that thing?" I breathed aloud, so intense was my interest.

The Titan drew a deep breath. "It has come to me that certain groups of Atlan are against the projected migration, and the recent disappearance of several men important to our work lends color to the story. Of course we all know that the only units able to do anything of the kind would be the key rodite of Sub Atlan and Center Mu. Some of these may have accidentally suffered a severe

p. 26

flashback of detrimental ion flow, so that their will has become one under detrimental hypnosis. What rodite area has become so corrupt as to allow such a condition to go unchecked I cannot understand; but that we are all in danger until the thing is checked is most certainly true.

"Therefore, since you here have gained an inkling of something wrong, it is only your right to be aware of it, so that inadvertent words may not cause you great harm. Also, we must fight this thing; and all of us must fight. So you may consider yourselves deputized by the ruling life of Mu to seek out the information that will clear the way for the migration. Until that is done we suffer fear, not new to me, but new to most of you.

"You may go."

Looking back at his gigantic form as I left the classroom, I saw him musing deeply; and the concern on his face told be that things must be even more fearful of consequence than he had made us believe. Reason told me, too, that it must be so—for great indeed must be the evil that can bring fear to the heart of a Titan, the super being of all Mu and of the universe.

That evening Arl took me to a dance. Never had I known that there could be such pleasure! And as a part of it all I discovered that my education was to continue through every waking hour, whether in scheduled class or not. There was so much to be learned from actual living! And Arl, it seemed, was determined that nothing should be lacking in my education. Nor did I object, for nothing suited me better than to have her, beautiful tail and all, showing her friendship and interest.

The dance, she told me on the way to the hall in a rollat car, was very scientifically handled by trained technicons. The stimulation of human attraction between male and female, she told me, was due to the generation of many kinds of tiny and fecund spores which grow and are released upon stimulus by male and female. The male spores grow in the female and vice versa, just as pollen between flowers. This cell pollen and the sensation of its growing presence is love. I could imagine the immense fecundity given this process by the strength of the Atlan race, whose growth and youth 16 never cease.

p. 28

We arrived at the place where the dance was to be held, and I found a great room, tastefully draped, and decorated by paintings that depicted such scenes of love and joy and health as I have never before seen. Just as the paintings at the Hall of Symbols held forth that invitation to join in the elevation of the race, so did these paintings show the way to participation in love and joy.

The dance had already begun and we joined the throng on the floor. Almost instantly I was aware of the influence of stimulating electromagnetic frequencies. I felt the flow of exd of appropriate attunements; my nerve cells responded in a thrilling fashion.

The stimulating rays strongly ionized the air of the hall; making it extremely conductive to the electric pressure of the body aura, so that the dancers were intensely aware of each other. The consequently augmented vital aura of the cell pollen permeated the hall. It was absorbed by my body, and by that of lovely, faun-legged Arl snuggled in my arms, and by all the young, ecstatic bodies of those who danced about us. Under the stimulus, we wove intricate patterns on the gleaming floor; and the odor music of the Atlans wove into the sound music many scent accompaniments. These scents are of the most penetrative and nutrient of all the food chemicals, feeding the nerves as they are driven into the body by strong sound waves of a penetrative frequency.

In the enhanced delight of the dance I was oblivious of all but the bundle of vitality to which my pulse and soul

p. 29

were synchronized, and my arms held Arl as a treasure beyond value.

Then, as I lost myself in pleasure, it happened. The madness of the fear that was upon Tean City struck; and for the first time in my life I knew the true meaning of terror!

Arl screamed, and pushing me from her, pointed to the edge of the dance floor. There the great shoulders of a horned son of a Titan hunched, one big hand clutching in desperate agony at the folds of a drape, the other pointing up and out to indicate the path of the ray that played upon him. Even in the face of death his only thought was to tell what he knew of the fear; and to point out its direction so that the technicons might answer with a ray of their own.

But nothing checked the ray; and I realized that contrary to all the usual rules there was no guard ray on duty. No wonder there was fear in Atlan! Slowly the huge youth's face turned black, his legs buckled, he fell and rolled over on his back, tongue protruding and eyes staring. He was dead.

His friends rushed to him, but the deadly ray had not ceased. It played first on one figure and then on another; each victim rolling in turn to the floor, face black with death.

"By the Elder Gods!" I swore to myself at the realization that no guard ray was going to protect us. "It is true; our perfect government is not so perfect after all!"

I stood as though oblivious to the fact that death might strike my way too. I could only look and rage within me at the death that played about the recently joy-filled hall. Within me the stimulating rays still caused an elation, but it was submerged beneath the surge of wrath that made my blood hot.

Arl was tugging at my elbow, the canny will to live of the female evident on her face in an expression of anxiety

p. 30

and calculation. Together we left the hall, taking a route along which her clicking hooves led me. We kept with a group of young Atlans who walked, without panic or the impulse to run, toward the parked rollats. I knew why; they feared to attract a spy-ray to themselves.

Arl's fingers pressed warningly on my arm, and I heard her whisper, her voice low, casual. An excited tone might have attracted the curiosity of the mad mind behind the black deaths, who must even now be surveying the scene of his mad acts of killing in grisly satisfaction.

"Listen to that man just behind us—"

I listened. His voice was also casual—held no excited note. In his voice was the cultured note that was evidence of one who has absorbed much of the vast education obtainable in Tean City.—"also heard that what lies behind the fear and death here is the mad wish of certain rodite to appropriate the whole fleet of ships prepared for the migration and go to the new sun leaving nothing behind alive with brains enough to build and fly ships in pursuit. Thus they would have the new sun's clean light entirely for themselves and their future seed."

A selfish thing, indeed! But more mad than selfish. Such a view could only be the result of detrimental err.

The speaker went on. "We, the mediocro, know how fecund life can be, but we also know the madness of refusing all of the normal units of life's fabric the right to existence and growth. No social fabric can be built of dull and lifeless robots which are so besotted with detrimental energy that they refuse the least of the units of the fabric their right to growth and intelligence. Therein lies the strength of the social fabric—the unit's realization of its own self and its place in the whole. The whole basis of a fuller life is the acquisition by mutual effort, the backing on which is woven the social pattern of the fabric itself."

I heard another voice, answering in agreement, yet with a troubled note evident in its tones, as if the speaker felt

p. 31

that agreement alone was not enough; that simply denouncing a thing that was as evil as this would not be enough. "Yes, this murderous effort is doomed to failure. The intelligent members of the guilty rodite must realize that such murder of the normal life unit is the refusal of their own right to share in the fruits of the social project. They must realize that such men as the Titan youth they killed have a potential value as great as their own."

Another voice chimed in. "Then why is it refused recognition? If they are intelligent, then why do they act so detrimentally? It must occur to them soon, or it will be too late."

"Unless they are all mad," said the first speaker. "The sane unit of such a project will see that the basic unit right is inherent to their own success, and realize that destroying those rights will wreck their own plans. The only thing it can he is the explanation a Titan growth technicon offered—that some rodite have been detrimentally charged by disintegrant coil leaks . . ."

I could not help breaking into the conversation.

"That is right! The thing has been explained to me that way; as a detrimental hypnosis in which the ego—or self-will—the self recognition of the mind centers confuses its self-originated impulses with the exterior-originated detrimental impulses to destroy. Such a condition is called dero, 17 or detrimental energy robotism. The thing is

p. 32

simple enough, but I cannot understand how it could happen here in Tean City, where perfection in romantics is so old. Such an occurrence is guarded against by many battle ro, by great organic battery brains raised for just that purpose. How could it happen?"

The two Titans looked at me and shook their heads. They knew as little as I how it could be.

"Well, it couldn't, but it did!" Arl said with feminine logic, and taking me by the arm, led the way to a rollat. In a moment we were speeding away from the dangerous area. Beside me Arl relaxed with a sigh, and I felt her trembling with reaction.

I put an arm around her. "Brave girl," I whispered.

p. 33

We were soon nearing Arl's apartment, and looking down at her fresh, young face, I felt a wave of worry pass through me.

"I wish we were under that new sun right now; on those fresh-born planets of life with clean new coordinating mechanisms under rodite we ourselves selected and could therefore trust. I fear that the migration has been too long delayed—the old sun's disintegrant pressure upon the unseen base of our life is now too great for anything else to happen than what happened tonight. Can we help to strive against this immense err, deep-seated in the control minds about us as it must be; or must we flee at once, before they make impossible our flight, thinking of it has a danger of tale bearing?"

But Arl's lips were on mine as the rollat slowed before her home, an effective quietus to my dangerous words, and my mind no longer dwelt on the fear—nor imagined the embrace of a six-armed giant Sybyl female or the crushing coils of a snake woman about me!—for it was too busy recording the ecstatic sensations of the intense vital charge the faun-legged girl threw into her embrace. My mind gave up its worry in Arl's soft contact.

The next day I entered the classroom and found it empty. I went to the incubation laboratory and found several other early students standing there in silent consternation, the fear welling up almost to openness in their eyes. The Titan was not present, nor were any of his attendants. Some of the embryos were dead, others half-smothered; because no attendant had turned on the filtered, enriched air tanks which kept their nutrient fluid supply aerated. I started toward them, but a young son of a Titan stopped me.

"I turned them on," he said in low, evenly-measured tones.

"Where is the Titan?" I asked.

"No one knows," was the answer I got from all.

p. 34

Other students came in now, among them Arl. She came to my side, but remained silent, troubled.

We waited a short time. Then a student called tutor center, to inquire. He turned to us with a peculiar look in his eyes.

"They say he is ill!"

"Ill?" The exclaimed question burst from all of us. In Atlan this was startling. Illness is almost unheard of; a rarity existent only on the space frontiers where new varieties of germs were sometimes troublesome.

The news brought Arl close to me, her silky-furred tail trembling as shudders shook her slim body. "Mutan, I am afraid," she whispered.

Her fear transmitted itself to me, and the thought came into my mind that this room was not safe. The same thought obviously had come to the others, because our movement toward the exit was as though by mutual accord. There was obviously some awful connection between the black deaths and the Titan's strange non-appearance. Yesterday the Titan had said a guard ray was on while he spoke to us so gravely of the fear—Had that guard ray been no guard at all? Had those evil rodite penetrated the guard ray, heard his words, known the Titan as a menace to their plan?

The: class was dismissed—this time by fear!

And somehow I knew that the thought in my mind was in the mind of all. We had the same knowledge the Titan had. We were in the same danger. We were marked for disappearance, illness, or the black death! We must flee, now or never!

Proof of the thoughts of the others came almost instantly. As we trooped in assumed light-heartedness down the tunnel toward the rollat ways one, of the accompanying youths proposed a picnic in the forest to celebrate the unexpected holiday. He said it loudly in a gay voice, and the others chorused their delighted approval, a delight that

p. 35

[paragraph continues] Arl and I feigned too. All fell in with the project, the unspoken desire to flee the city strong in our breasts, our anticipation of being together among the trees, which subterranean dwellers seldom see, strong too.

I raced ahead with Arl, shouting gaily, "Let me lead you to the elevators." There was meaning in my voice, and intent in my mind. I was not forgetting my promise to my friend, the control-man.

We reached the shaft that led to Sub Atlan, from which we would take another lift to surface Mu. There, as we shot upward, I whispered the news to the control-man. "The terror is loose in Tean City," I concluded. "Escape as soon as you can. If at all possible, beg off from another descent and be away. There is great danger for all whom they suspect are aware of them."

He retained a straight face, but I could see the concern in his eyes, and the determination to make good his escape also.

As we lolled in apparent ease on the soft sod of the culture forest, the traditional empty glass made its appearance in the circle. No one spoke of it, but its significant reminder of death's clutch was a constant thing in my mind. Never had fear and death been a part of my thought before; but that empty goblet with its sweetly spiraling stem uppermost was no longer just tradition, but now had a meaning almost immense. What to do to avoid that damnable mechanical play of detrimental force from the mind of some unknown rodite, staring through the viewplates of his defective, detrimentally hypnotic mechanism, seeking to destroy the best first? 18 If they thought we were escaping they would seek us out and snatch us back.

p. 36

I sat and mused. "Simple magnetics; yet such mighty minds as the Atlans fall before it. We must be clever . . ." I went on thinking of it; but again recurred the regret of last night. If only the migration had taken place a few years ago! But perhaps it had been so planned; and delayed? Delayed by the black death which had thus far struck so secretly and silently. The plan of the rodite must be near completion or their secrecy would have been maintained.

And then, as I sat there, an idea presented itself. I knew a way to escape, and I spoke quickly before my thoughts were clear enough for any unseen listener to read

"Let us all charter a space ship and take a look at Mother Mu from above! There is no greater thrill than that to cap the day!"

As one we leaped to our feet. I knew then that our thoughts had been very similar; I had only been the first to express the next step in spoken words.

"We will have to take a shuttle ship first," said a young Titan quickly. "Come, I know the way."

Accustomed as I had become to variform life, we presented a strange, almost fearsome appearing company to my eyes as we made our way toward the shuttle ship station. There was young Halftan, of Venusian blood, long-legged, web-footed and fingered, his eyes huge and faceted; his mate, a girl of Mu except that some forebear had given the line four arms, probably under the stimulus of mutation rays because the family pursuit of making instruments was one where twice the number of fingers could well be used; Horton, a young fellow of mixed bloods, older than the rest of us, quiet, but long-eared and sharp-nosed—a listening fox; his girl, a thin, gray, transparent-skinned maid of Mars, fragile and lovely, her large, leaf-green eyes lighting devoted friendship wherever they rested; two young Titan sisters, their horns just sprouting from under their curls, their great bodies new-budding into womanhood; their two escorts, of the Elder's special creation, large-headed youths of tremendous intelligence, their hands double-length, their necks and shoulders by far stronger than normal to carry their great heads easily, and finally a young Titan male, accompanied by his friend who was a distant cousin of my own Arl and whose sprightly, colorful femininity hinted that Arl's family must be especially noted for their beauty.

Together we made up a company of twelve life-forms of great diversity; and yet all of us citizens of Atlan; citizens apparently on an outing, now bound for a gay adventure to end a holiday's festivities in the supreme thrill, a sightseeing trip into space.

p. 38

We dared not think of our true purpose; and I knew that at least the two Elder escorts were aware of what had brewed in my mind and would back me up when the time came. We thought only of our coming adventure, and tried to feel the delight of it so that even our emotions would register true to any spying teleray that sought us out to check on our motives.

The shuttle ship we boarded was a small, bullet-shaped plane containing little but a cabin, air-making equipment and a small fuel compartment in the rear. This plane was not a space ship, but only a sort of bullet to be shot from the surface of Mu to the large station ship of great weight which circled in its own orbit, just as the moon circles the earth forever.

To get the shuttle ship on its way gravity was neutralized by an upward beam of semi-penetrative force traveling at light speed which was turned on gradually until the car just floated in its cradle under the effect of the reverse friction to gravity of the force blast passing through the car. 19

When the weight of the car was thus reduced to less than a pound, I turned on the rocket blasts very gradually and traveled up the reverse gravity beam by instrument. In thirty minutes we were circling the huge station ship as though we were in our turn its satellite just as it was a satellite of earth. With vernier rocket blasts, about the size of toy pistol explosions, the nearly weightless plane approached a landing. Above us spread the world we had just left, making an imposing sight as we settled into a cradle atop the space station.

p. 39

When we stepped from the shuttle ship at the edge of the oval landing area, we saw several globe-bodied moon-men bustling about their own type of shuttle plane, a long, wingless splinter constructed of a very fragile and glass-like substance. Although I feared to think upon it, the moon was my next destination. One thing that all of us knew was that we never intended to return to earth. The blackened face of that son of the Titans, the noblest blood in Tean City, as he lay dying on the dance floor rose before me to tell me flight was not only best, but the only course for us.

In spite of myself my eyes roved over the black dome of space, searching for the lights that might indicate a pursuing craft. It seemed almost impossible that we were fooling the mad rodite and their spying telepath rays. In spite of all self-imposed mental guards, my mind seemed intent on shrieking "Escape! Escape!" through every possible loophole in my concentration.

I engaged the gnome-like moon-men in conversation in an attempt to still further blanket my turbulent mind. Arl caught my eye and wagged her tail in cheerful encouragement, seeming to divine what was on my mind. How expressive that beautiful tail of hers was; how much it could say; and with no dangerous thought waves to betray its meaning to those who must not receive on their sensitive instruments. With that tail, no language, no thought-transference was needed!

But even if pursuit developed, I had one trick up my sleeve. I dared not think of it, or some watching rodite informer might advise any pursuers of my plans and a way to circumvent them would be devised.

It struck me that not all of the rodite might know of recent conditions and developments in Tean City. Nothing had been announced on the tele-screen news. Thus, while we were escaping, others ought to know the truth, and certainly not all the rodite were dis-infected. They would

p. 40

not report what they read in my mind, and the rodite who knew would not attach special significance to others who knew; and the very fact that it was thought about in an unguarded way might cause them to dismiss us as of immediate danger, and thus blanket our intent to escape.

I thought of the dance, of the sudden striking of the black death on the dance floor, of my puzzlement as to what it might mean. I thought of the disappearance of our tutor technicon, wondered if he too were murdered. Any sub-rodite, getting a register of my thoughts, would certainly ponder the meaning of the unbelievable existence in center Mu of murder; murder whose actuality he could not doubt, because it would come to him as the unguarded and therefore true thought of a ro such as I was.

In double-quick time, still acting out our enthusiasm for an unexpected holiday, we chartered a fast space ship for an hour's time. An attendant led us to a cradle on the landing stage; and we entered the ship gaily.

The speedster rose slowly up the lifter beam under my control and when it was clear of the station ship I sent it hurtling outward.

When we were well out of sight of the station ship and picking up speed toward the moon I gave up thinking of our trip as a sight-seeing outing which was to proceed only a little way into space and then return, but began to think of the moon as our destination, meanwhile setting the autopilot destination needle on Venus. Then I pulled the throttle back to full on.

If what we had heard of the black death were true, it might well be that no space ships were allowed to leave the vicinity of Mu at all. Just the mere fact that we were hurtling straight away might have placed even more suspicion on our purpose if we maintained our original thought-fabrication. With the moon now our revealed destination, our true purpose was still veiled.

p. 41

I switched on the electrically magnifying scope screen to the rear to look for possible pursuit. The scope had a screen of microscopic photo-cells which turned the tiniest light ray into an electrical impulse which was greatly augmented by vacuum tubes and the resulting impulse made a much larger cell on a viewplate glow strongly, giving a vivid image in half-tone.

Far behind us a craft sped along. Was it in pursuit? I watched it for long minutes, but there was no way of telling. It maintained its distance and its course. In a very short time their instruments could check our course, and if they were pursuing us, they would be unable to correlate it with my mental image of the moon as our destination; and they would be after us instantly. If they were merely harmless travelers to Venus, there would be no questioning of our own course.

I gave them time to check us with instruments, then I set the course pointer on Mercury, a planet almost never visited, and watched closely. The strange craft veered.

"They are on our trail," I said. The words broke a silence that had become almost intense.

Arl's cousin looked shocked. "Then we can't escape," she said. "They have a mechanical advantage over us."

One of the big-heads was eyeing me shrewdly "You have a plan," he said. It was a plain statement of fact, not a question. It was as though he did not ask what was my plan, but expected me to put one into operation now that the crucial moment had come.

"Yes," I agreed. "Now is the time to play my one card. I hope that it will be an ace."

"We have not asked nor even wondered about your plan once we observed that you had one," said the other big-head. "But now the time for secrecy is at an end. It is unnecessary. If we cannot escape, our intent to do so will be useless to hide; if we can escape, our intent will not need to be hidden."

p. 42

"True enough. And I will be more than glad to relieve my mind of the strain of withholding what is in it," I said. "I am but a ro youth, and the task has been hard."

"But one that you have done well," observed the young Titan gravely.

I accepted the compliment with a thrill of pride. Praise from a Titan was something to which I was not accustomed—indeed, old Artan Gro had many times given me exactly the opposite.

"It is a matter of mechanics," I explained. "And the one thing I will be forced to blank out of your mind as I do it. I warn you all not to think on the matter when you see it performed. As to my plan of escape—I have an even greater one. I will explain fully in a very short while—we will go to one of the sunless Elder stations on a cold planet. The nearest of these is Quanto, on the very rim of this solar system."

"A good choice," approved the big-heads. "But one that rouses our curiosity in your 'mechanical trick' to a high pitch. Obviously you know that Quanto is seventeen and one-third billion miles away." 20

I could almost read their minds. "Yes. Weeks away at the speed of this ship—and we have no food."

Even Arl's tail stopped wagging at that—but only momentarily. In her eyes I read that confidence I knew she had in me; a confidence that she herself felt was justified.

"Your plan!" she reminded me. "Now we know you have a definite one, for if you are aware of the fact that we have no food you must also be aware of a way to reach Quanto without it."

"Such great faith must be well placed," murmured one

p. 43

of the Titan maids. "I, too, can have no fear now that you have a plan."

I proceeded now about the thing I had in mind, taking care not to think of what I was doing, but think, rather of the appearance of my hands as they worked, of the movements of my knuckles, of the muscles that caused those movements, of the nerves that carried the message to the muscles. . . .

It was a good thing for me now that I had listened so worshipfully to space pilots when I was younger; some of their adventures were going to stand me in good use. Autopilot mechanisms on these space ships were adjusted to a fool-proof speed, so that no speed-mad citizen could wreck a shipload of people. There was a stiff spring on the throttle, just a little stronger than a man's arm, which held the fuel flow to a safe maximum.

I found the case of the auto pilot locked and the key was naturally not aboard the ship, but kept by the attendant back at the satellite ship. But I found a way around that. I took the belts from several of my companions in spite of their puzzled faces and fastened them into one strong line. One end went around the throttle bar and with another I took a turn around a seat arm.

A dozen strong Atlan arms pulled the belt line taut at my bidding, and I took in all the slack at the seat arm. Back came the throttle bar. The acceleration of the ship spilled them all in a heap at the rear, but I held fast to the line and the bar stayed back.

Now our safety depended on whether the pursuing crew knew this simple trick—for many of the pleasure craft. which our pursuer plainly was, were as well powered as the police craft, although their autopilots restricted them to a much lower speed. If the pursuing craft's pilot did not think of adding other men's power to the strength of kis own hand on the throttle bar, he would never overtake me. Even police craft were set to less than maximum motive

p. 44

power, as the tubes burned out too quickly at full blast.

I watched the dark speck on the rear screen anxiously and slowly it grew smaller and smaller. When it had vanished the youthful Titan pounded me on the back until my ears rang and my knees buckled.

"You're a sly fellow, and your whole plan of escape is right. It's high time we ran away from the black death. I've worried and waited for it to strike me long enough. The Elder station on the cold planet are the best natured men you can find in space. Haven't been near a sun in centuries, and don't know the meaning of the word evil!"

He turned to the others and continued speaking eagerly. "They'll take us in, give us entrance cards to any government in space  Personally I would choose some civilization that warms its cities with its own fires, and shuns all suns entirely. I've had enough worry waiting for Atlan's rulers to get wise to the danger and move. I want no more of these sun-bitten zany dero around me!"

The gray Martian maid spoke, her sensitive green eyes shining with admiration, her voice the slow singing speech of Mars

"The best thing you did was not to tell us what you had in mind, for someone would have read our minds as surely as Venus loves us. We have lived in dread and indecision for many moons. The black death has struck day after day and no official word of it. No one can tell who is dead; there is no way to tell if anything is being done about the danger or not, for anyone who made the slightest effort to do so disappeared at once just as our loved teacher did. We all know that he was not ill; and we also all know that the day he made that announcement to us he had signed his own death warrant—but he had evidently decided he must, as no one else seemed to move. It has been terrible, and if you had planned this flight with us we would never have gotten away. We have been very lucky to get this far. Now, if you will take my advice,

p. 45

you will go at once far beyond any influence from Mother Mu's rodite, under another space-group of planets, and there we will learn how to live where such things as the black death do not exist."

The smile she bestowed on me was Martian magic.

It must have been the look on my face that prevented any further remarks by my companions, and caused them to look at me in new curiosity. If so, my next words fanned the flame of that curiosity.

"I spoke of a greater plan, a few moments ago," I said. "And I am afraid it does not call for such conclusions as you two have made. I am sorry, but neither of you have given me any advice that I like, as sound as it may seem."

"Speak on," prodded one of the big-heads, his eyes alight with interest.

I checked our course briefly to make sure we were headed for Quanto correctly before I answered him. Then I made myself comfortable in a cushioned seat and faced them.

"What is it that we have been fleeing?" I asked.

"Basically, an aging sun," said the young Titan reflectively. "The black death is merely a result of detrimental action on certain rodite who have become dero and even ray. We have fled from them, but the real cause of our flight is the sun."

"Do we flee as cowards, deserting our comrades?" I asked softly. "Or do we flee only that we may be able to make a new plan to take the place of the one that has been interrupted by the rodite dero?"

There was a wry smile on the face of the big-head. "The day has come," he said, "when I have seen a ro put a Titan to shame! Of course, Mutan, we do not flee for cowardice, but to gain time and life to put up a fight. It is only that we have not thought it out as you have Nor has inspiration as yet given us such a plan."

"Then listen to mine," I said, "Just as it is with you,

p. 46

my first thoughts at realization of the fear that lay in Tean City were those of escape to a place where there was no fear. It is a natural reaction, especially if that possibility suddenly presents itself.

"Let us analyze the fear. First, the top unit of the force behind the black death must be a man in a very strong position, to stall off the whole migration as has obviously been done, and to control things so that no news leaks out about the terror that is otherwise so plain for many to see. So high and powerful must this man be that to fight against him on Mu itself must be to invite certain defeat. Perhaps even if we were to muster all clean-minded Atlans to the battle, we could meet only the same frustration as the migration plan has suffered—for is it not true that all Atlans who are aware of the danger of the sun's evil have made utmost effort to bring about the migration?"

"True enough," said a Titan maid. "No Titan has been unaware of the danger, and lately, even such ro as you have been brought into the plan. Perhaps it is fitting that the salvation of that plan come from the mind of a ro."

"Then here is the only salvation I can see," I said. "We must go to the Elders of Quanto. Through them we must contact the mightiest of the Titans and from them get advice and assistance. This thing may well become a space war before we are through—and as I see it, it must be so, or all the Atlans of Mu will be lost!"

I looked at Arl, to see if she listened, and she wagged her tail roguishly. Not only was she listening; she was thinking in tempo with me. At my glance her voice chimed in, doing things to my spine.

"Yes, and we ourselves must devote ourselves to the task, and go to a place where the growth rate is unlimited by law, so that we can become more equal to the job. It will take great power to displace the mad rodite. On Quanto we must find some mighty and old and wise technicon to go along and assure us of a hearing; otherwise the

p. 47

power will not be given us. We need the very mightiest power the Elders of space can give us to save the people of Mu."

"If you but wag that tail of yours at them, Arl, they will give it to us!" I laughed because I could see in all those around me the same conviction and devotion to my plan that was in her. The youthful company laughed too. "Of that there can be no doubt," they agreed, whereupon Arl swished her tail before them and pirouetted about on her clicking hooves.

In that instant the fear was gone from our minds. Instead we were filled with gaiety and hope, and great determination to do all that lay in our power to end all fear.

We circled Mercury, straightening out on a direct path for Quanto, constantly accelerating until it was unnecessary to explain why lack of food did not worry me. The young Titan remarked: "We will be at Quanto within twenty-four hours. Already our speed is approaching that of light. 21

p. 49

air locks. At last we were in the home of the kindly men from sunless Nor!

I leaned back with a sigh of thankfulness, feeling that I had saved at least some of the good life seed of ancient Atlan from the madness that was overtaking all of its races under the aging sun. To save still more would be a collossal effort; but as Arl's arms drew about my shoulders, I knew that such effort was worthwhile.

The purpose of life was plainer now. Such beauty and tenderness did not live in words or in paintings. Only in understanding and caring for the life seed, the bearers of future race growth, could a man find the true meaning of life. And in the mighty job that lay ahead in enlisting aid for the saving of our people from the black death of the mad rodite I knew I would become a man or die.

We found the typical welcome that all the great ones accord to visitors. Our party was courteously received by the attendants, and we were directed to the administrative offices with swift efficiency.

For me, this first visit to a world people by other than Atlans or Titans was one of the most interesting of my life; but I did not find it half as exciting as my first glimpse of Tean City had been. The men from sunless Nor were of an amazing blondness, for no light but of their own making had ever struck their skins. Their size, as did that of Titans and Atlans, varied with their age and with the age of the parent. Thus, a son of a man of a hundred years age would be three times the size of a son of a man of thirty. 23

Further, the race from Nor, who are called Nortans, are a straight race of men. There had been no intermingling

p. 51

of races of other forms, not because it was forbidden, but because their technicons had not made the variform technique of breeding available to the public and without it all such intercourse is sterile. Perhaps they are right, although I see much beauty in variforms—especially in my own lovely and completely desirable Arl with her beautiful, expressive furry tail and her dainty, clicking hooves; certainly their race is beautiful and vital enough to please anyone.

All about the city of the Nortans it was evidenced by many wholly unfamiliar devices that the science of Nor had forged ahead of our own; and as I looked about, I knew why. Here was none of the fear that had pervaded Tean City; nor was there any of the sun-poison to be a detriment to constructive thinking in even the slight degree that evidently has long deterred the technicons of Mu from full scientific advancement.

The thought of the fear brought the need for haste once more home to me as we walked through the city toward the administrative buildings. It was better to continue our flight than to remain long even here, I knew. So, to improve time, I kept running over in my mind the desperate plight of center Mu; the delaying of the migration to a newborn sun; the fear of pursuit that was still with us; for I knew that in that administrative building toward which we were headed some watchful Elder of Nor was most certainly taking thought record of our minds, to see if there were harm in us.

So, when we reached our destination, it instantly became evident that we would have little explaining left to do. And at the same time, another thing became evident to me that filled me with terror. Fear, again, in the one place where I had thought I would not find it!

A young lady of the snowskinned Nortan race glided toward me, her hand outstretched in greeting, her voice a soft bell of welcome for all of us.

"We have read your thoughts and understand what

p. 52

brings you here. Follow me now to the Princess Vanue, chief Elder, for an oral check; and forget your fear, for soon you will be going to where fear is not. Your message spells danger to us, as well as to your poor, helpless fellows in Mu." 24

It had been the words "Princess Vanue, chief Elder" that had struck a new kind of fear into me. The chief Elders had been described to me in Tean City. They are the oldest  of the race, and are given official power, according to the yalue of their achievements to the race. They are of both sexes, and have learned all there is to know of the secrets of growth; how to manufacture their own life-supporting essences, nutrients and beneficial vibrants. And on their ability to improve upon the standard nutrients of the people often depends their success. Thus, when a simple ro like myself comes near one of these Elders, his will becomes their will automatically; for it is overcome by the great, all-pervading force of the life within them. One hardly notices this when the Elder is of the same sex, but when that life force is of the opposite sex the attraction is so great as to be irresistible. So true is this that seldom is a ro of one sex allowed too near an Elder of the opposite sex; for never again would the poor ro free himself of love for the Elder.

My spirit trembled when I knew the Elder to which we were being taken was a woman; a woman who for unknown centuries had absorbed all the essences of growth-promoting substances. And too, Nor was a place where growth science must be far, far ahead of our own sun-baked

p. 53

sciencon's achievements. Never would I be able to free myself of the spell that: woman-force would cast upon me!

I looked desperately at Arl's sweet face. Never again would I love her if this thing were true. In Arl's eyes I read the same fear, and I know then that she surely loved me and I was torn by the approaching loss. However, I dimly understood that it must be necessary—for no man near an Elder woman can deny her the truth of love for her.

We left the building and presently were ascending a long, transparent boarding tube into the side of a space liner that lay like a sleeping monster in the launching cradles. This was one ship that could land directly on a planet! But then, Quanto was small. We passed through a series of airlocks, reached the inside of the ship.

It was a long way into the center of the ship. As we progressed, I noted that all the ro who passed were maidens; beautiful white Nor maidens with glittering white-yellow hair that floated about their heads in a cloud, so fine was it that it was air-borne.

Soon I became aware of an aura of complementary forces that I knew came from the Nor Chief Elder, Vanue, whom we were undoubtedly now nearing. Her force scent grew stronger as we approached a mighty door set across a corridor. In glowing letters of hammered metal above this door was the legend:

VANUE
Elder Princess Of Van Of Nor
Chief Of Nor On Quanto

The great door, I discovered, was an airlock; to hold in the ionized and nutrient-saturated air of the chamber. These chambers the Elders seldom leave, since all evil is restrained from entering.

As we passed through the lock, the terrific stimulation of this conductive electrified medium seized us in a mighty ecstasy. We were drawn as by a powerful magnet toward

p. 54

a huge figure which was an intense concentration of all the vitally stimulating qualities that make beauty the sought-for thing that it is.

Within me I could feel the compass of my being swinging toward its new center of attraction. I was no longer myself. I was a part of that mighty being before me. My thought was her thought; I was her ro until she chose to release me.

Could she release me? I could not even wish it, nor ever would. Within me I knew that, and I felt no resentment, no regret—only joy.

All of eighty feet tall she must have been. She towered over our heads as she arose to greet us, a vast cloud of the glittering hair of the Nor women floating about her head, the sex aura a visible iridescence flashing about her form.

I yearned toward that vast beauty which was not hidden for in Nor it is considered impolite to conceal the body greatly, being an offense against art and friendship to take beauty out of life. I was impelled madly toward her until I fell on my knees before her, my hands outstretched to touch the gleaming, ultra-living flesh of her feet.

Beside me the other youths from center Mu were in the same condition of ecstatic desire.

As our hands touched her flesh, a terrific charge of body electric flowed into us. We fell face downward in unbearable pleasure on the floor.

She picked us up one by one and placed us on the desk before her. Waist-high now were our burning eyes. She bent to meet our gaze; and the mighty beauty of the eyes of the Elder princess of Nor flashed a question into our minds. As one man we chorused:

"Yes, it is true! Evil has the upper hand in center Mu; in Tean City itself!"

It was then that I realized how far ahead of Mother Mu's Titan and Atlan technicons were the Nortans and,

p. 55

[paragraph continues] I supposed, all other great ones of the dark worlds. For Vanue wasted no more time on us, but bending toward the banks of instruments before her throne, pulled a lever and through all the ship was heard the warning signal of departure. As if they were my own, I knew her thoughts! Quanto was to be evacuated.

The Nortans were certainly not the sun-spoiled sleepyheads our own race had proved to be. She understood the awful danger that could threaten a planet's multitudes’ under the thumb of the dero madness.

At her willed command we all ran to seats that circled the throne. They were mounted on acceleration absorbers. The grand hand pressed the bar that lifted the now weightless ship up the force beam flowing out of the cavern.

Even through the thick walls of the ship we heard the huge airlocks scream shut behind us. Then we were out in space headed toward Nor, the vast cold planet where this Elder Goddess’ daughter had been born centuries before. I realized that our precipitate departure was sure evidence that our news had meant much more than nothing to Vanue. She had enough Elder God sense in her to know that flight was imperative. There were misgivings in my breast as I wondered if any Atlan Elders or rodite had knowledge of mighty Vanue's presence in Quanto. It might make a great difference if they did!

As the acceleration lessened toward the midpoint of our takeoff, freeing us from our seats, the whelming voice of the great woman-being swept us.

"You children will remain with me until your future is settled. I will thus be sure that you are fully rewarded for bringing us such vital information."

The soft, singing voice of the gray maid from Mars questioned her, and in its notes was gray also.

"Will you . . . can you . . . then give us back the love of our dear ones, which has cleaved to you?" There was a powerful pleading in her voice that penetrated even

p. 56

through the blanketing ecstasy that held me.

Infinite tenderness and compassion seemed to flow from the eyes of the great one.

"There is a way to do that," the master voice answered; and she bent swiftly toward the Mars maid, her great eyes flashing a strange thought I could not wholly read; a tender woman-language into the eyes of the Mars maid.

That simple Martian magic had made another friend, this time a great one indeed.

It was a strange passage. Most of it seemed more a dream than reality. Such things as the tremendous gait we built up—far more than light speed—and the great distances we traveled were the realities, but I barely noticed them. More real was the unreality of the thin, lovely forms of the Nor maids moving about their mighty princess, the soft fires of their floating hair like seedling flames from the vast fire of Vanue's god-life crowned by its floating cloud of yellow; our own eyes burning like the spotted wings of moths against the screen of her will; the sad faces of our own maids beside us, gazing first at the fierce white flame of her body and then at our own bemused selves; the vaulting of the vast ship walls about us; the unfamiliar instruments blinking and whirring.

It was a very real dream to me—a dream I knew I would never stop dreaming. Strange passage. . . . Ever the whisper of the feet of the Nor maids on some swift errand; the soft rumble of the voice of their living Goddess and the answering bright song of her worshipping maidens. Yes, it was a strange passage, and every mile of it brought home a fascinating realization.

I had embarked on the most amazing voyage of my whole life. The very thought of what now certainly lay before me was enough to stun my mind into an apathy of thinking that was hard to overcome; yet my mind was so full of excitement that it did strive to think, to add to the realization of what the future would hold. A new life was

p. 57 p. 58

at hand; opening to wonders that staggered me to think of them—and awed me into all-engulfing reverence.

To live to become what this Nor princess had become; to have the love of people as she had the love of these Nor maids—that is the real dream. I knew that I must gain the key to the door of a way of living that would lead to the full value of the Nortan life.

So it was, sitting in the thrall of that too-strong beauty of woman-life, we noted so little. How much time passed? I will never know. It was as if all body functions ceased, as though food and drink were not needed—as long as we were in the presence of Vanue of Nor. But I did know that she was in continual communication with the planet Nor over the space telescreens. Face after face appeared before her, murmured briefly and intensely, and vanished; only to be replaced by others. I knew vaguely that she was calling for a conference on the strength of our information; and sensed also that we would attend that conference at her side.

The thought dawned on me slowly. Here was an honor few ro ever attain in the first century of their growth. By old Mother Mu! To see those Elders of Nor, the whole lot of them, male and female, all at once . . .! That would be more than one could well stand. An overpowering, devastating ecstasy. . . .

Well, it would be an interesting death.

I never knew how much time the voyage consumed; but it seemed very soon that the great vessel floated down the landing beam into the white and yawning face of a landing area on a station satellite of Nor while I and the other youths dreamed on almost oblivious in the quarters of Vanue.

Still in that dazed dream of love we followed among her maidens into the tubes and aboard the special shuttle ship awaiting her, and shot off to Nor looming not far away. We did not pause on Nor's dark surface, but descended into the depths of a great cave toward the council place somewhere in center Nor.

I had thought in the past that the Titans were mighty of thought and size—but what I saw now eclipsed anything I had ever heard of the glories of our own races. Big and vital as was Vanue, she was but a little child among the tremendous Nortan Elders and Gods.

There are no words to describe what the development of unchecked growth in man brings forth. These ancient Nor-tans, who had studied and purified all the source-substances of growth and combined them into an endless variety of nutrients which they introduced into their bodies by many means—borne in electric flows; on penetrative sound waves; by injections; by direct feeding—had been growing at a fierce rate for unknown centuries. Their inner beings had evolved in various ways, so that they were evidently of a more complex atomic and molecular construction than ordinary flesh. There is no way to describe the qualities of

p. 60

thought, of inner strength of spirit seen on their faces and in the aura that is always about such beings.

We trooped after Vanue as she entered the vast reaches of the council cavern and took her throne by the side of her father, a mighty bulk of man-flesh but only a lesser luminary in that gathering.

Before the council came to the business at hand we were treated to a brief prelude of entertainment—psychologically a reward for the effort of coming to the council. It vas a prelude to music and dancing, a review of the best talent of the planet, calculated to bring the minds of the council into harmony on the subject of the welfare and glory of the race. Entertainment, yes; but the amusements of Elder Gods are nothing to pass over.

What it all meant was beyond me; I was aware only of the awful beauty and tremendously fecund strength of the dancers—bred and fed by wizard technicons of growth; trained to express meaning and emotion of a kind too vast for ro to grasp. They danced in a vortex of conductive rays which carried their thought and body essence, augmented by apparatus, to each watcher.

The climax was the appearance of the greatest beauty of the planet—a sorceress of the art of entertainment named Hypaytee—who wore on her head a device which caused a vast augmentation of the thought images of her mind to play about her body in a tremendous revealment of the infinitely developed soul of woman. I had loved woman—hut never before had I undestood even vaguely what development did to the greatest value of life. The rewards this woman could give a man by the use of her mind alone, coupled as it was to that mighty, sinuous dancer's body expressing all the things that draw men to women, brought the concourse of Elders to their feet in an earth-shaking applause and a mighty vow to care for the race that produced her. This thought was also projected from the control rays which took root in every heart. It came to me,

p. 61

too: and I was a Nor-man now, no matter what I had been before!

Then Vanue's thought flashed out, setting the thought cloud 26 areas into coruscation with an alarm, a command to attention. I was brought out of my daze to see my own thought record projected in the thought clouds. I saw once again, as real as the first time I had seen it, the fear on the faces of the six-armed Sybyl of the Info screens; the striking of the black death at the dance; the hideous fear on the faces of the dancers; Arl's sweet face contorted in a scream.

A thought-record from the brain of each of our group from Tean City followed. It was evidence enough, thus gathered together, that evil had the upper hand in Mu.

My own efforts to conceal my thought as I planned our escape and the trick of the belts on the throttle that had resulted in our success finished the record display.

I was mightily surprised to hear applause and a great thunder of voices calling for me—Mutan Mion of Atlan. They called for me, the stupid artist! those vast voices from hundreds of ancient beings, some of them three hundred feet in height!

Vanue held me out in her two hands for all to see. And as I became the center of their attention, my embarrassment exceeded any emotion of a similar nature I had ever had. If I had known that they would think of an escape from such a condition as so much of a feat it is probable I would never have tried it. I would have been hopeless of success frôm the very inception of the fool-hardy thought.

p. 62

I was put down again, my face red, my thoughts flustered, my embarrassment a flood of discomfort in me—but a discomfort that held within it a strange glow of humility that was at the same time a glow of pride. I was proud with a just pride; and I felt somehow that it was not my own pride, but the pride of Vanue, whose utter slave I had become. Vanue, Elder of Van of Nor, was proud of her ro!

The actual conference of the Godheads took place now in thought projections in the thought-cloud area. I saw that any thought, no matter how abstract, could be projected in these clouds by thought augmentors. 27 They used an image language instead of words, and their talk was to me but a whirlwind of changing forms, faces, geometrical figures, maps of space and figures on orbits and many

p. 63

other things incomprehensible to me and probably to most of the ro present. The powerful minds of the Nortans functioned too rapidly for us to grasp any but the simplest meaning in the ideographs unfolding in the cloud before us. But I did gather that some action was to take place at once to save the Atlans and the Titans of Atlan from the derodite.

Now from the mists of the Elder Gods’ highest throne of all came a swift ray that lanced down and touched me delicately. An ecstasy of change came over me. What that ray did to me and told me in the next brief instant I can never say in any words. Then a voice spoke out:

"Muton Mion of Mu, we have seen the great compassion and love for your fellow man that lives in your breast. We admire such greatness in such a tiny ro; and because of the love of man in you we have decided that it must not go without full satisfaction in deed.

"You came here to gather together an expedition and return to Mu for the rescue of your comrades who are in deadly danger. Never could you carry such a gigantic project as this would require to its successful completion—and yet you have done it; for we of Nor have made a solemn vow to rescue the men of Atlan on Mu and to destroy the derodite who threaten to spread their evil even into dark space.

"However, because of your great desire, we have planned a place for you in this great mission. You shall have your part in it; and you shall have another duty which is worthy of your capacity for compassion. We, the Nortans, have seen in your mind a vision of the far future—of a time on Mu when men shall be slaves of the degenerate sun around which it circles; of a time when they will be but mentally deficient savages living out a life span compressed to an irreducible minimum by radioactives. This may be a true vision, in part or in whole—for we may not succeed entirely in our mission. We may even fail!

p. 64

"Therefore, we give to you the task of preparing a message, in great duplication, to these pitiful men of the future—so that there may be some hope that those among them who have the mental power to fight against their cruel environment may make their lives in some measure complete. This message will be left on Mu, and in it, in many places for future man to find."

The voice ceased. The conference was over.
As we passed from the misty vastness of the council cavern Vanue turned to us of Atlan, trooping behind her, and said in a serious voice.

"It is law among Nortans that no service to the race goes unrewarded. Now there are certain things I plan for you which I cannot give you legally except you swear to serve me always as my loyal followers. Is there anything to keep you from that?" Her eyes searched us one by one.

The Mars maid answered, her eyes shining:

"There is only our oath to the state of Atlan, and the present evil conditions render that oath void."

Vanue went on: "I am only a young Elder; you might do better than to follow me—my fortune in the future is not wholly assured. You might do better!"

"You have honored us, Vanue," said the Mars maid. "You have let us see your mind at work; we know there is no evil in you. That your fortune should be our fortune is enough for me. You have said you will give the love of our men back to us, and though I don't understand how you will or can, I know you will."

One by one we swore loyalty to Vanue before all other greater beings.

Then Vanue looked at her Nor maids and said with a strange innuendo that made them laugh with delight and anticipation: "Now we must send them to school—in pairs!" The laughter of the gold-topped lilies of Nor rang merrily.

What sort of a school was this, I wondered, to make them laugh so?

p. 66

The tubes took Vanue's train to the doors of her own cavern palace. Huge air locks swung open to admit the whole procession into the under parts of the palace. When we stepped out into the special air of her home that tremendous acceleration of the life processes that I had noted in her chambers in the space liner again seized us—and life became a thing to really fear to lose.

But as yet I had no inkling of what lay before me in the mystery of the wisdom that had built that place to house their first borne, Elder Princess Vanue, daughter of the Elder Gods of Nor.

Flinging off her wraps, which she had worn to the council chamber because of their significance, Vanue said: "We will put the children in school, and then to our own work. We have much to do to make ready and the time is short."

"School" turned out to be a vast laboratory—a replica on a much mightier scale of our own Titan technicon's laboratory school where Arl and I had learned to know each other and the possibilities of life. Instead of embryos, the nutrient tanks contained six foot ro and even much larger men and women.

Taking Arl and me in her hands she placed us in one of the big tanks. The liquids were warm and comforting and we splashed about playfully while others of our Atlan group were also being placed in pairs in tanks like our own.

Then Vanue's maids swarmed about us, placing wires about our arms, our wrists, our hands and feet; fastening breathing cups over our mouths; thrusting needles into our veins and attaching them to the ends of thin tubes; placing caps of metal with many wires connected to generators and other machines on our heads; covering our eyes with strangely wired plates of crystal.

I heard the tank cover sealed and more fluid gushed in until we were completely submerged. We floated in suspension within the tanks.

p. 67

Then began a strange thing; for our minds, Arl's and mine, were conscious of each other through the medium of the interrelated wiring and the plates over our eyes—an awareness that must have been augmented a thousand times. Her breath was my breath, her thoughts took place in my head stronger than Vanue's ever had, and the woman-soul of her was so augmented in my mind as to eclipse all other woman's appeal that my memory had ever recorded.

A strange little voice (it must have been Vanue's speaking over a telethought instrument) whispered beside me: "You will never escape Arl now. You are her slave forever." And as I listened, I knew that Vanue spoke the truth.

Arl's face, laughing before me in the eye plates, became larger and larger, entered my brain, became the wellspring of my being. I heard Arl's thought, a vast river of force flowing in my mind, saying: "Where I go, there will you go also. The thing that is my desire is growing in you. My roots are your soul. You are my desire and the slave of my desire!"

And I heard my own thought make answer in Arl's mind: "So it shall be, always, oh maiden of the clicking hooves and swift hands, of the beautiful tail, of the clean will and strong desire!" And I knew that what I said was true.

The fluids and forces that were pulsing through us made these things grow within our beings, so that centuries of loving contact were replaced by minutes of furious growth; and we fell asleep, strangely within each other our thoughts, growing and becoming an integrant part of our being. Through every fibre of my body I could feel fecund growth swelling and expanding, patterned by thoughts which were mine and yet not mine. In my ears strange sounds beat mysterious meanings which were forces taking root within me. My memory was a vast garden of new thoughts growing as my mind grew, and remembering all

p. 68

the principles that came over the wires from the Elder Gods' own thought record.

Always overhead I could feel the Nor maids watching my mind pictures and correcting the growth memory so that everything took its rightful place. And within me I could hear Arl, sleeping and growing too, and she was very dear.

The thing that was me slept as a babe sleeps in the womb, and the seeds of the Gods' thoughts took root in Arl and me and grew. We were at once children asleep in the womb of the God mother, and man and wife wrapped in each other's adoring arms. Time flowed by like water; and we slept but were more awake and alive than ever before, and felt the pleasure of each the other's body and soul appeal, the very inner essence of man-life and woman-appeal to man. Life pulsed from each of us into the other constantly. We had more pleasure of each other in the growth school tank than ever I have known of in any pleasure.

Among the things that became a part of my knowledge was the promise of the future in such tanks as this: Sometime Arl and I were to build such a tank and appartatus and take a long sleep in it and awake as Gods, full of the strength and the beauty and the pleasure of life and life's fulfilment.

So it was that Arl and I were married by an actual mingling of the seeds of our being, and not by any foolish ceremony; blessed by the actual love of Vanue, now our Lady, and not by any meaningless words.

Though we were in the growth tank less than a week, we came out inches bigger in every way; but the real growth that had taken place was an inner growth—for I was vastly heavier and my strength was aware of new limits.

Mentally, too, I was vastly more able; for when I looked about at the apparatus I knew the inner construction and

p. 69

use of every bit of it, and I knew that from then on few things would mystify me other than the work of the very oldest Gods.

I found that I had not lost my love for Vanue, but that I loved her now as one loves and is grateful to a leader. My love for Arl was the strongest thing in me. 28

p. 70

All of us found out now that Vanue was not the most foolish of the Elders of Nor, despite her comparative youth, but was looked up to everywhere as one whose star was in the ascendant. Her followers were more numerous than many much more prominent Elders.

Arl and I spent several days together in our love, and in seeing the wonders of Nor's civilization. Here was a vast series of underground cities, all heated and bathed in beneficial energies artifically created. No need for a sun's light to live. No danger of dis-integratives from a dangerous sun poisoning the soil and water of the planet, to cause slow death by age.

Then one day Vanue called me to her.

"I speak now of the mission the Elders of the council granted to you in the conference chamber. As you remember, your part in the coming task is two-fold. In one phase of this you will accompany us to act with us in the great war that must be fought. We have developed a plan in which your help as an advance and secret agent is

p. 71

necessary. You will be told more about that later, when we have embarked.

"Now, however, your other mission begins, here on Nor. It is the mission of love for your fellow men. No matter how successful we are in rescuing the men of Atlan, it cannot be that we will rescue all of them. Many must not be rescued! There is nothing we could do for them, poisoned as they are to the point of death. Nor must we allow any of this poison to escape to the dark worlds where it can infect others. Too, the dero influence is dangerous, and madness must not spread over the universe.

"Thus it has been given to you to inscribe on imperishable plates of telonion, our eternal metal, a message to future man which will be placed on and in Mu so that those who have the intelligence to find and read it may benefit by the truths of growth and defense against a too-soon death by age.

"After the passing of Atlan science from Mu, men will begin to die at the same age, and their sons will all be the same size at the same age. This will be caused by accumulations of sun-poison in the water of Mu, which will stop all growth in mankind at almost the very beginning of their development. They will scarcely get beyond childhood before they will begin to die.

"These plates you will inscribe will contain a message that is a key and a path to the door that will open life value to these future men, whose fate we know and pity, but cannot prevent. We can only teach them what we know that will enable them to get the most out of their life on Mu. The dero will not be able to read, and thus will die as they should. Those whose minds are powerful enough to escape complete dero-robotism will read and profit.

"You can tell them how to attain this life growth by freeing their food and water intake of all the poisons that will be found in it in the natural state. The age poisons can be removed by centrifuge and by still; their air can be

p. 72

made a nutrient by proper treatment and freed of all its detrimental ions by field sweeps of electric. The exd on which the basic integration of life feeds can be concentrated (just as it was in your body in the growth school tank) in energy flows which greatly increase the rate of growth and the solidity and weight of the flesh.

"Tell future man to do these things, Mutan Mion, and their reward will be great. You have seen what the reward of such effort can be—in thousands of years of life's fullness—even on a planet under a detrimental sun. We cannot save those men yet unborn. We can only leave for them the heritage that is rightfully theirs, the heritage of our sciencon knowledge. And you, Mutan, in your infinite love and pity for your fellow men, shall perform this task with all the energy that your love makes possible!"

I left the presence of mighty Vanue, marveling at the understanding of the Elders and Gods of Nor. No wonder that their race is so great. To me, the humble artist of Sub Atlan, had been given a great mission; one that thrilled me to my depths. I hurried to Arl to tell her all about it.

"The wonder of it!" I exclaimed, having repeated what Vanue had told me, "In my hands—the simple-awkward, unskilled artist's hands of Mutan Mion, culture man of Mu—has been placed the hope of future man! To me is given the honor to preserve for men yet unborn the knowledge of their heritage of life!

Arl held me to her, and her eyes were shining. "Yes, I understand," she said.

"There is more!" I went on. "The Nortans set out soon to rescue many thousands of Atlans and Titans and their variform offspring from the threat of death by a dying sun's radioactives, and from the black death of the derodite; but I, Mutan Mion, am to be the rescuer of untold numbers of future men down through the history of Mu, until the very planet is dead! Think of it . . ."

Arl kissed me tenderly. "Go, Mutan, and busy yourself

p. 73

with the beginning of the message. You have but little time, and I think you should begin by putting down the story of Mu—our story!—and thus give body to the message to future man. Perhaps he will not even remember Atlantis! Nor Tean City, nor all the other vast cities of center Mu. Perhaps he will not even remember that there ever was such a being as an Atlan or a Titan or a Nortan. It will be your duty to tell him that, too, my loved one. For how can he believe and hope if he has no knowledge of the truth of life?"

"Most certainly must I tell them of you!" I exclaimed. "Never in all Time was there such a woman!"

And kissing her again, I hurried off to the sciencon laboratories to gather the materials necessary to begin scribing my imperishable plates of telonium with the message of hope to Lemurians unborn.

For many days I worked, putting down the truths and the knowledge to overcome the poison of age to the fullest possible extent, as it is now done in Tean City and all Mu; and the means to full life growth. I told the story of our flight from Mu, and much of the history of Mu. I told of the Titans and the Atlans who live throughout all dark space; who are seaching ever for new suns. I told of the Nortans; who do not believe in living near any sun, old or new.

I brought my message up to date—and barely in time. For when I had finished Arl came to me.

"Vanue's ship leaves for Mu in a few hours," she said. "You must be ready."

At that moment it hit me—these were my last hours with my loved Arl until I returned from the war in Mu; if ever I returned. Now for the first time since reaching Nor I knew sorrow. But Arl saw what was in my mind, and her words brought joy back to me.

"I am to go along, as operator of one of the telescreens on our own ship," she announced happily.

I should have known that my loyal Arl would never

p. 74

consent to remaining behind while I went into danger!

"Your life is my life," she was whispering as she snuggled in my arms. "Where you go, there also will I go. Your soul's nearness is my desire."
It had been but a short month since our arrival on Nor. Many had been the preparations, most of them unknown to me. Only now as I went to the launching cradles did I see the full extent of those preparations. I found a fleet of mighty space vessels lifting from the frozen face of Nor, leaving to gather at a rendezvous in space.

Vanue's own vast vessel was not the least among the fleet, nor I and Arl the last aboard. On her viewscreens we watched countless other ships lifting on reverse gravity beams with what seemed to be almost utter ponderance until they reached a point in space where they could take up normal flight. New-built ships these were, wonderful in their engineering and armament.

We watched, also, many Nortans, mostly Nor war-maidens and Nor warro, embark on our own ship. Vanue herself was already aboard, together with several other Elders of minor stature. They brought with them vast quantities of material of unguessable use. Observing it I understood that their purpose was not wholly to save the people of my race from their sad plight, but to nip in the bud the growing power of Evil forces so near their own stead in space. That they were wholly confident of their ability to do this, I knew, but I knew also of the mighty armaments and endless warrens of the Atlan armies. I had seen their tremendous vessels maneuvering around Mu on the viewscreens and the news teles. I hoped the Nortans were not overconfident.

p. 76

But as we proceeded into space toward Mu at greater speed. I found that I did not really know the Nortans. I had underestimated them. They understood concept, and I came to realize that concept had become a frozen thing on Mu by comparison. The Nortans used the truth, for it was the right conceptual attack. Evil has no concept; it is a mad robot to detrimental force. When Evil has power and men must obey or die, then only is it to be feared. But sometimes men fight for Evil unknowingly.

As we passed an Atlan space station a Nortan ship would land and presently take off again, followed by all the ships of the station. They had just told them the truth. The Nortans had an ancient reputation that forbade any doubt of their words. It was as simple, and as powerful, as that.

This went on so often, that as we neared Mu the Atlan fleet with us was nearly as large as our own. The truth can be a mighty friend and these space warriors knew the Nor-men and trusted them.

So impressed was I by the ships of this vast battle fleet that I was tempted to go to my quarters and describe them as part of my message to future man; but I abandoned the idea. I reasoned that if my message were a needful one when it was found, its finders would have little use for, or need of, such technical information as the construction of space weapons.

Perhaps when they learned again to fight the aging power of the sun and the evil her disintegrant force can bring to life, they could again learn such other things as they would need by searching space for friendly peoples. There was an idea—I would put down the information necessary to direct such a search. It would be a simple thing—for the great ones would never be found near or under the rays of a sun as old as this one will be by then. Aging suns would always be a space horror to be shunned by all men. Only the action of the derodite on

p. 77

[paragraph continues] Mu had kept our own Atlans so long under its rays. Only on or near dark worlds and new suns would the great ones be found.

It was while I stood at Arl's side watching still more Atlan ships join us that a thought came to me.

"How can the Nortans so quickly trust the ships of the Atlans as to allow a number of them near their own fleet?

"Silly," chided Arl, flirting her tail at my question, "they don't trust them. It is not a question of trust. They just place a very large female Elder aboard each ship as it joins our fleet and there is no further question of trust or obedience. Supposedly she goes aboard 'to advise the commander as to our plans and to interpret our ways to him,' but you know the real reason—"

"Of course!" I interrupted her with a rueful grin. "I should certainly understand from my own recent experience with Vanue!"

Atlan warriors are all male. Those commanders and their men would be unable to do anything else but obey, with complete loyalty. They could not do otherwise, for they could not find the will or wish to do it. Not even the commanders of space ships are Elders by any means. Under the spell of that vast woman-life, they would be helpless to her will in their ecstatic love for her.

There were maneuvers as we neared Mu, but I saw little of them. Most of the time I was busy with my telonion plates, inscribing further knowledge or duplicating them so that they might be deposited in Mu in many places.

Another job I had which took up much of my attention was the task of making thought-record from the heads of men in Atlan vessels nearby, in an attempt to learn what had happened in Mu since our flight. They knew little, for the telenews had evidently been as uncommunicative of Atlans’ true troubles as before. Some whispers they had picked up, but nothing of great value.

p. 78

I kept on, but it was of little use. They knew just enough to make them ready to join us, but no more. There was nothing that would help us in the coming battle. All we knew was that we were enroute to war upon an enemy who was undeniably powerful, but whose identity we would have no way of knowing—until he struck first! And that first blow might be a terrible one . . .

Noting some agitation in the ship I was watching, I focused on the commander's quarters just in time to hear the last of a general message from surface Atlan:

"—and since we hold the population under our war rays; and since the safety of that very population we know to be your objective; let me warn you that the very first sign of an attack on your part will be the signal for a general slaughter of the people on our part. They are only in our way anyway. You may kill us in time, but you will never attain your objective!"

The horrible import of the message stung me into inactivity for a moment, then I recovered and with haste swung my ray to hear Vanue's reaction to this problem-posing message. What would she reply? Or had she a reply to this development? Death for the very people we had come to save rested in her hands . . .

Then came Vanue's voice; and it held a world of bafflement in it, a note of defeat that opened my eyes wide in disbelief.

"Return to Nor," was what she said!

Return to Nor! Abandon our mission? No! It could not be. There must be a ruse in Vanue's mind. Vanue was not the kind to give up, even though the odds seemed great. Then what—

Vanue's voice in my mind said a single word: "Come."

I switched off my thought recorder ray and bounded down the corridor toward the great doors of hammered metal, a wild joy in my heart that at last she had need of me, and that certainly this was a ruse.

p. 79

Even before I reached the great doors I knew one thing: Vanue's ship was not retreating toward Nor as the others seemed to be. Under cover of the swarm of retreating ships, our own vessel had slipped into the moon's shadow as we passed her and had come to a halt hanging there invisibly in the moon's earth lee.

Once I arrived before that vast flame of beauty I sank to my knees, but she reached out a great hand and raised me to my feet. From her desk she took a tiny box and showed me its one projection—a tiny stud; a switch.

"Take this and put it in your clothes. It looks like a pocket reading machine, and it will not be noticed with suspicion. In the locks an Atlan ship and pilot is waiting for you. He has been directed to take you to surface Atlan.

"Once there you will mask your thoughts in any way you please, for I know your ability in that respect. Then go to your old home in Sub Atlan. There turn on your telenews and wait beside it until you hear three clicks from it, repeated at uneven intervals. Then take out this box and press the metal stud full in. It will tell you what to do next. That is all."

I bowed low, kissed her foot's radiant flesh, and ran from her quarters.

The Atlan ship was waiting for me, the pilot ready and silent. He pointed out my old Atlan student's outfit, which was already aboard, and indicated that I was to wear it. I jettisoned my Nortan uniform and in a moment was once more Muton Mion, life-culture student of center Mu.

When I had completed my transformation I found that the ship was already rocketing down the regular passenger lane from moon to Mu. The pilot, an Atlan, spoke a few words of explanation and lapsed into silence.

"I am a taxi driver and you're a passenger. Mind that—and luck!"

It was all so simple. I could hardly believe it would work. But it did. The ship settled on the public field. I

p. 80

jostled my way into the tubes, and soon was roaring along toward my home—a student returning from an outing.

I switched on the seat telenews but apparently nothing was happening.

It recited the most inane occurences: a taxi motor failure had plunged two fares and the driver into the sea, and they had escaped with a ducking; a snakeman had caught his tail in a subway door, but would live; our adored chief Elder was having a birthday, may he have many more . . . I switched the telenews off. Anything could happen—and to Atlans nothing out of the way would even be whispered. Of the vast Nor fleet that had been so lately above, not the slightest hint. Great was the control of the derodite in Mu!

Not easy would be the task of the Nortan invaders!

Reaching Sub Atlan, I made my way to my own home, threw my hat at the old place on the hat rack, embraced my mother and kissed the tears from her dear face, slapped Foster Dad on the back and answered his grunted "Where in the whirling world of woolheads have you been wandering?" with "Just sewing a wild oat. I'll tell you about it at dinner," and bounded up the stairs to my old room where I switched on the telenews and lay upon my bed, carefully masking my thoughts by thinking what tale I would make up to explain my outing to Dad.

Three sharp clicks from the telenews startled me. I had not expected the signal so soon. Vanue must have been watching. I leaped erect, drew the box from my pocket and pressed the switch. A voice came from the box.

"Put this box on your head and put your hat on tightly to keep the box in place. Do not take your hat off for any reason from then on. Go outside and walk around the block. Soon you will notice a strange thing; after which you will get more directions."

I did as directed, promising to return soon when I dashed past my astonished mother and father. I stopped only long

p. 81

enough to retrieve my hat.

Outside a strange drowsiness came over me. It was hard to move. The lights of Sub Atlan flooded the ways, but I ignored them and walked slowly around the block. I noticed the girl at the food tablet stand lolling fast asleep over her open cash drawer. How very careless of her, to sleep so. But then I found the service ro at the rollat stand also deep in slumber; and several of his customers sprawled in slumber on the seats with the doors open, the hood up.

The voice in my hat explained the mystery.

"By now everyone in Sub Atlan but yourself and certain others is asleep. So will you be if you remove your hat and the box, which gives off stimulating vibrants.

"Go at once to the administration center and switch off the auto watch and general attack alarms. Bind the chief Elder and anyone else who seems able to frustrate a landing. Then, wheneverything seems safe, put a communication beam on our position and guide us in"

The Administration building in Sub Atlan is a great tower which reaches not only to the roof of the cavern that houses Sub Atlan but through that roof and on up to surface Atlan, where it looms as the tallest building on the surface also. Great rollat ways connected the surface building with the sub building.

I activated a rollat at the curb stand, dialed the administration center's number, and drove the rollat by hand directly into the great hall and up to the doors of the council chamber. As I arrived I was surprised to see four of my comrades, Atlans from Vanue's ship, racing into the hall behind me from rollats at the curb.

I nudged the great doors with the rollat bumper. They held. Turning the thing I drove across the hall and came back at full speed, crashing into the great valves and at last they gave. I plunged into the hall, brakes squealing.


  It all began when my sister, Betty, and I were in a downtown St. Louis coffee shop. We had been shopping and had stopped off to get a coke and refresh ourselves. While in the coffee shop we were approached in a very mannerly way by two gentlemen dressed in grey suits, who managed to interrupt into our private conversation. As they spoke to us we found that they were from a huge mother-craft orbiting the planet Earth, and that their names were Elen and Zelas. They told us that we had been very closely watched by the Space People for the last eight years, and that our progress had been noted off and on from the time of our birth. Betty and I were both inclined to think that someone was playing a silly joke on us and we laughed when they told us this, but they were not laughing and were serious and stern. We were strangely shocked, however, when they told us of a few incidents in our childhood that no one could have possibly known except the family. They told us that we had been selected as contacts by the people of space to serve as channels through which they could give certain information to Earth, and that we had been carefully watched, as I stated before. They told us of the reasons why the space people were coming to Earth and that they were here to guide Earth along the lines of Brotherhood and Science.

     We were very much amazed at their words, and we noted particularly the kindness and warmth that shone in their eyes. With a single glance from them we seemed to sense the vast wisdom and brotherhood which they must have lived among. After talking with us for a little over two hours they left and told us they would contact us again, but it was not until a week later that we were impelled to again return to the same coffee shop.

     When we entered the door we again saw one of the Space Brothers, and he gave us instructions at that time for building a device whereby we could contact the Space People. His instructions were explicit and precise, for he warned us that unless we placed every piece of the device in the proper place we would not be able to contact them with it. We were not allowed to take the drawn diagram of the device with us, But we had to remember it as it was explained to us. When we obtained the proper pieces for the device we constructed it when we returned home, and were happy to find the results were satisfactory. We were amazed when we tuned in on the mother craft and spoke with the same person we had earlier seen. We were also allowed to speak with the commander of the craft, who at that time was known as Alna. In the following six months we spoke many times with the space people through the device, and received much information about their homes, sciences and craft.

     In November of '57 I was alone in downtown St. Louis on business when I was again contacted by the space people and at their request went with them by automobile into Illinois where we drove to a heavily wooded area. There, I was told, was where they landed when they had business or contacts to make in St. Louis. Settled back behind an old barn was a circular craft that I judged to be approximately nine feet in height, and about 38 feet in diameter. It had a domed top, but no portholes. The sliding door was open and there was a uniformed operator sitting at the controls.

      I was nervous although I knew no harm would come for me, and I was visibly shaking, but Zelas only smiled as though to reassure me. The flight to the mother craft took approximately 15 minutes, and I was told the magnetism of the small craft would not affect my watch since it would be balanced by the magnetism of my own body. However, while in the mother craft the magnetism of it caused my watch for stop, and it was de-magnetized in a small machine before I left.

     Inside the mother craft we entered the huge receiving room for the smaller craft. There were many huge machines in this room, and there were also many other uniformed men standing around obviously working upon the machines or moving them about. They glanced at us when we entered, but then returned to their work as before. The hall that we entered was softly lit and was curved both at the ceiling and comers. We entered the first room to the right which appeared to be a room for relaxing. There were divans and contoured chairs with white upholstering that had a thread or design of a golden hue woven in it. The room was meticulous and vast, and as I stood observing the beauty of it three uniformed men approached us. Their uniforms were of a blue-gray color with a slight metallic look, and I learned the jodphur type boots they wore were actually attached to the uniforms, and were not a separate piece of apparel. The uniforms were soft to the touch and the texture of velvet.  I was then introduced to three men and learned that one was Alna, the commander of all craft operation upon Earth. Alna spoke with a very heavy accent, and was much darker than any of the others. His skin had a high bronze tint to it, as compared with the lighter complexions of the others.

     From this room I was shown the control section where I was told our calls were received when we operated our device. Here they placed a call through to our telephone in St. Louis by adjusting a series of dials, and I was allowed to speak with Betty and tell her that I was with the Brothers. I was also shown a scope similar to a television screen, the only difference being this was at a slight elevation on the control counter, instead of standing up at eye level or in a box type cabinet which our television sets consist of. This scope could obviously reflect any particular building or house that the space people desired to observe, and when I looked at the scope when Alna requested me to do so, I could see the inside areas of my home and could see my sister, mother and the children moving about. It was as though the entire roof had been removed and only the walls remained of the house. When I asked them how this was done, they explained that the first set of vibrations that left the roof were erased and the vibrations of the furniture and people inside were received on the scope, and therefore it appeared as though the instruments in the control section were actually looking through the building.

     From this section we entered another much larger control section and I watched other uniformed men going about their work with much deftness and swiftness. I was told then that we were going to dine, and when we entered the dining area it appeared as a vast empty room. However, tables and chairs rose from the floor section, and I dined with them after humbly and respectfully listening to a prayer Alna said in the Universal Tongue.

     The food consisted of three different types, and a drink similar to apricot nectar was enjoyed. There was little conversation during the meal, and when all had almost finished Alna told me I could witness a dance performed by two of the Space Brothers. This dance was most unusual and fast, during which the two men passed a small object from one to the other, sometimes throwing it in the air and catching if before it fell upon the floor. I expressed my thanks to Alna for allowing me to see this, and when we left the dining area we moved down the hall to what obviously was an entertainment room where the Brothers spent many relaxing hours. Many men were in the room, some sitting at tables and others playing a game similar to our Shuffleboard. I was asked if I would like to try the game, and after watching Alna I understood simply how it was done.

     A round colored disc about four inches in diameter was placed on the floor in a particular square, and by mind power alone the disc was to move across the floor to another particular square. This section of the floor was electrically charged and receptive to the thought waves leaving a person's mind. Alna took a blue disc that was handed to him and placed it on the floor causing it to move a considerable distance. Then I was handed a red disc and asked to try. I was doubtful if it would work for me, and the only thing I could think of was to silently command the disc to "Go." I was amazed when the disc moved slowly up the floor, but quite some distance from that of Alna's. When I glanced at my watch and noticed it had stopped, it brought Alna's attention and he said for this time he felt I should not be held up longer from my other activities, and that a second trip would be longer. It was then that he took my watch and placed it in a small machine in the first control section and then set it for me, obtaining the proper time from a scope that contained many symbols and crossed lines on it.

     Then with Zelas and Benen I returned to the craft receiving room and entered again a smaller craft with them. I do not know exactly what series of air locks the craft enter and leave the mother craft, but there was a large dark section upon the floor in the receiving room and as we entered the smaller craft to leave Zelas pointed it out and told me that was area where the craft left. The trip back was quick and short, and as we drove back to St. Louis I recounted in my mind all the things I had seen. Being alone, I wanted to be able to tell anyone else as much as I could; however, we decided that we would not then tell everyone else of our experiences until we had enough information to relay to the public. Last year at Buck's Convention we were called upon to speak, but we were neither prepared nor expecting that we would be called upon for a speech. I did, however, say a few words and since that time we have delivered several lectures to various groups.

     A few weeks later we were contacted by the Brothers and were told that the Martian Council had requested us to speak of the powerful effects of the A and H bombs and also the future of those responsible for their evil. When we were told these requests we asked, for information to give Earth's people, and the following is what they gave us. It was prepared by one of the Brothers known as Sigt. I will go directly into his message and then would like to take up a subject that many people have questioned us about such subjects as evil flying saucers and evil space people, also strange phenomena that seem to defy natural law will be spoken of. Now, I would like to give you Sigt's message:

     "Earth's scientists are creating around planet Earth the most deadly condition to material man than ever. The explosions of the A and H bombs are placing the residue particles of radioactivity into all the materials of Earth. Each human being upon Earth now carries a certain degree of radioactivity in their bones and systems. Why should it be significant to hear of this when you cannot see the radioactivity, nor hear it as it does much destructive work?

     "In the advanced laboratories of Mars we have proved the destructibility of such uncontrolled energy. Radioactivity drops, upon the grass, buildings and people after being carried by the air currents around an explosion. This energy is in minute particles that have the effect of deterioration to the molecules of all material things. This radioactivity settles around an object or body and penetrates the outer area of the surface or skin. What does radioactivity look like you may wonder.

     "As an explanation, many of you have seen small dust spirals along the streets or in a dusty area that swirl around and around in circles that then seem to disappear. Radioactivity has the same effect and looks very similar as it settles around a body. The small particles are caught up in a swirling counter-clockwise motion that causes them to be driven down into the surface of the body cells. This energy, once inside the body, offsets the balance of the normal cell and causes it to become either agitated into more activity as it tries to cast back out of the system, or else the radioactivity attacks cells that are already weakened by illness, and immediately sets up a destruction of them.

     "When this new activity occurs in a normal cell a powerful microscope would reveal the atomical structure of the cell is creating a counter offensive action that is clockwise as compared to the counter-clockwise motion of the radioactivity. When this occurs, there is eventually a breaking down of the cell's motion, for as the explosions of the A and H bombs continue the action of the radioactivity is strengthened by this and overpowers the clockwise motion of the body cells that are attempting to throw off the radioactivity. Thus, the body cells are forced to become activated in the same manner. This creates a drawing together or construction of the cells and creates abnormal conditions and illnesses. As the radioactivity increases the rate of motion increases around each body living on Earth. This changes the cell formation and in the next generation this inherent condition is accentuated by the accumulated mass of more radioactivity. In the second and third generations these changes are visible as definite deformations of the body, and this in turn, if not controlled, will lead to a generation of mutants.

     "What does radioactivity sound like? I will try to explain. Many people are receptive to certain high vibratory sounds that are derived from the atomic explosions, and are the elemental changes in the atmospheres of Earth. These high pitched sounds are very serious, for they can almost pierce the very soul consciousness, and cause changes there. The consciousness of Man is being affected every day by these vibrations that these explosions have created, and unless these are altered or until the explosions of this nature are stopped the Mind of Man will be changed in drastic measures. Some of these notes can cause a perfectly healthy person to develop a fatal illness, some can affect the mental processes terribly, other of these vibrations, if not altered within the consciousness of the individual, can cause one to commit acts that otherwise would not be done. But most serious indeed are the changes in the! atomical structures of the atmospheres of Earth. Here the greatest battle of all is arising. The Earth wants to separate with this activity, but the consciousnesses of the higher evolved here upon Earth and in Space are preventing this, until Earth can adjust.

     "How can you stop this from happening? The answer is simply stop the unnecessary tests of these bombs. For those who maintain it is necessary to show the military strength, we can only say what strength is there to be shown that deprives the people, vegetation and animals of a perfectly beautiful and attainable future otherwise. Is it truly possible that the deceivability of such destructive weapons can replace sane, sound actions of better living? It is necessary now for the Space People living upon Earth to take protective measures or otherwise suffer the same effects from radio activity as the citizens. It is not possible for us to give Earth's people enough of the protectors without the co-operation of the governments, and such cooperation is at present unattainable. The continuance of these tests are affecting all responsible for them, and if one accepts reincarnation as an answer it would be definitely seen why no one here or responsible for these tests would want to re-live again in mutated bodies of the future generations. If reincarnation be unacceptable to the average person, then the knowledge that these tests are mutating their children and their children's children should be sufficient reason for stopping them. Our warning to Earth is cease your tests and save your future."

     What the Space People are trying to make clear in this message and many others similar to this is that Earth is now in a most perilous situation, and faces self-destruction of humanity. In the two years we have contacted the Brothers they have been concerned and talked most frequently about the destructibility of the A and H bomb. Speaking of this destruction, the questions I mentioned earlier come to my mind, and that is concerning the evil flying saucers and evil space people.

First, we must consider the evidence presented. There have been saucers that were reported as having a negative effect upon people by burning them or causing nausea, etc. And in some instances there have been cases reported where people have been assaulted by beings that have emerged from some saucers and actually attacked them. The descriptions of these beings have been generally of a small type of people who were unusually crafty or mischievous and who actually grasp people and attempted to drag them into their craft. Where do these beings come from, and why are they entering this system? No doubt most of you will agree there is a tremendous battle going on between the good and the bad, which concerns all thoughts, actions and influences. From thousands of years ago to the present age this battle between right and wrong has been waged against civilization and has balanced first in favor of the good and righteous, and then turning and swaying in favor of the wicked or evil. This strange course of events has been necessary for certain conditions to prevail upon Earth, so that beneficial results would come about. The devastating bubonic plague that swept Europe in the Dark Ages was indeed a terrible thing and was judged to be just that by the people, but this negative condition actually paved the way for more sanitary conditions. All evil will give way to the good, and all wrong has a right.

     The space people that have negative qualities about them are coming from farther space systems, although I do not wish to imply that all space craft from farther systems is evil. Many of the craft from farther systems are very good and are also trying to help Earth; however, it is only those certain evil systems that we should consider when I say those from a farther system than our own. It is these negative beings who are here for the purpose of actually taking people from Earth to indoctrinate them with their ideas, so they in turn will cause confusion and disturbances upon the planet. The true purpose behind this is to prevent harmony and peace, for they are in alliance with those beings living in Earth, who themselves will be forced to leave Earth when peace and brotherhood is completed. The gains that these negative people obtain from their alliance with those other negatives in Earth is not known by us, but it must be quite profitable for them to engage so actively against the Space Brothers who are trying to help Earth. The Space Brothers who are trying to help Earth have to contend with these craft and beings from other less desirable systems, and also have to contend with the disbelieving masses of people who either do not know of the need for harmony and peace or those who do not want to listen to their urgent requests. The job of the Space Brothers is not easy, for it is necessary to prepare the people of Earth to accept their existence, and also to guide them in proper understanding so that peace and co-existence will be possible.

 

     Many people seem to feel that the negative beings are only from planet Earth and consists only of those fallen angels who were cast out of heaven by a Supreme Command from the Most High. Many can quote the proper passages of the Bible and prove that there are fallen angels living here on Earth, who cause the necessary confusion and evil which we here must live among. There are those intelligences of superior powers whom we would call fallen angels living in Earth, but it is not wholly from them that the evil or bad flying saucers come. As you look up into the sky at night you see multitudes of stars, planets and suns moving on in beautiful orbits. However, if you could move out through  space and watch the barbarous conditions that exist upon some of these stars you would be shocked. There are some systems advanced in scientific accomplishments to the degree of mastery over space, but those systems have advanced in science alone and have little spiritual advancement.  They come here to Earth and to other planets in farther systems to form alliance with those intelligences who will provide them the necessary fulfillment of their evil desires and wishes.

          Planet Earth is now visited by such craft, whose occupants live and profit from the unrest and disharmony present. Who can truly say what percent of our actions are fueling these beings with necessary materials and profit. What these profits are cannot be said by us, for only each one of us in our own understanding can know in Truth what their actions consist of that could be used as a fuel by the negative ones. These negatives can present very good arguments and can deceive the unwary in many ways. Their goal is to conquer and own, without any concern how they do it. They may use one form of attraction one time and another the next. Now, how, you probably think, do we know about this. I can only say that many times, more than we have recorded or remembered, we have been interrupted in our attempts to contact the Brothers by means of our device, and then encounter the beamed transmission of a negative craft. In many instances these beings have mocked our efforts and have belittled the Brothers and us. Other times they have lied and said they were the M-4 Section of Mars and they had a message for us from the Council, and that we were to say such-and-such or else we were to stop speaking altogether. Patience is a good way to win with their persistence, for they cannot persist too long without getting angry and revealing themselves. Once we were interrupted by them and told flatly who they were and what they wanted us to do. They asked us to prepare a book for them and expose the whole untruth connected with the story of the fallen angels. This book was to be delivered by one of their very advanced minds, and to be created in manuscript form by us and offered for publication.

     Please notice that I said this book was to be done in this manner at their request. We refused to do as asked by them, and burned the first few sections of their story when it was delivered to us. From that time up to the present we have been interrupted only occasionally, and then their attitudes have not been quite as demanding. We refuse to have anything to do with this type of beings and wish to serve only those of goodness and light.

     The subject of negative beings can be connected directly with much unusual phenomena that seems to be completely contrary to natural law. However, nothing can defy the absolute laws that God created, but many of these laws are simply not known nor understood by millions of people. The percentages of people who can manipulate these laws is very few. As said before, many beings of a negative nature do live in Earth, and there are some of these who have the power to do unusual things. Many times strange phenomena have been noted to take place, such as objects moving freely in the air; articles appearing and disappearing; solid objects passing through walls, door, etc. The number of unusual happenings are numberless. Many of these happenings are due to the mischievous minds of negative beings, who merely change the molecular polarity of the structure of an object and cause it to pass through the air as though defying gravity. Truly such an object is moving freely through space, but only due to the natural law of gravity.

     If an object such as a glass contains the positive polarity of mass, then the earth below it is of a negative polarity. Merely by changing the positive polarity of the glass to a negative polarity it will cause the glass to push away from the earth which is also of a negative polarity. The law of a magnet can be applied to this simple demonstration, for "Like polarities repel, and unlike polarities attract." Two negative polarities will push away from each other, whereas two polarities of different natures will cling to each other. Thus, gravity, or more simply said, polarity controls such unusual demonstrations. It does, however, take a very great Will Power to command such objects to move. Nothing can be done outside of natural law. Misapplied power and nonsense must still obey the laws of God, for nothing can be outside of His Laws. An important thing, however, is that not all unusual happenings are the result of negative beings, but much of it is unknowingly set into motion by the minds of Earth people, who happen to set into motion the law of polarity and gravity.

     I would like at this time to dispense with the subject of negative things, and like to direct your thoughts to something of a more affirmative nature. I would like to give you a little of the prophecy for Earth that the Brothers gave us. However, at no time do the Space People or Betty and I want you to think that these prophecies are definitely what will happen to Earth. The Brothers told us that these things would happen only if Earth follows the path of advancement that she had been doing before the explosions of so many bombs. These explosions could alter these conditions very much, for as the Brothers said, these explosions are altering the atmospheres and materials for Earth. It is from man's past actions and advancement that these prophecies are derived, and it is from this that the future is formed. Thus prophecy can change and 10 years from now these same prophecies could be wrong, but only if Earth's people continue with the A and H bomb explosions and if a series of serious battles and conflicts result upon Earth.

     As for the prophecies themselves, the Space People tell us that Earth will have an axis change, and that this will cause America to become warmer and certain parts of Europe to become colder. This axis change should come about slowly and be a gradual thing, and will be if nature is left alone; however, there are certain people who wish to bring about this change too quickly. As for the manner of clothes people will be wearing upon Earth in the future we will see that the men will wear clothes that have a tighter fit, whereas the women will wear looser and longer dresses. The homes will change with the circular home being preferred. There will be a screened dome top to the homes, which will open to let in the air. Lighting will be from the walls and a circular rim around the ceiling. This lighting will be automatic and adjust itself to the proper brightness. All power for the kitchen, laundry, heating and lighting will be provided by small individual units in each home that is inexpensive to operate. The countryside will be beautiful, for all wires, telephone poles and power stations will disappear, along with the billboards and other unsightly scenes.

     The entire mind of man will enlarge in spiritual growth, for unmoral books, shows and entertainments will be revised to teach Truth. Television will be the greatest channel for Truth to reach the minds of the people. As the mind of man changes to higher thoughts, so, too, will much of the material requirements change. And it will come to pass when the dietary habits of man will also change. No longer will slaughter houses be seen, for the eating of meat will diminish. It will not entirely disappear, but the vast slaughter of animals will cease. Earth will cease to have epidemics of disease, and therefore newer systems of laboratories will appear. Illness itself will be an individual thing, and will be corrected, quickly and safely in the laboratories. What more can we ask for, for doesn't this sound like Earth could be a beautiful place? There is more--much more--but time does not permit me to enlarge on all the prophecies for Earth. Among the many things to happen, Earth will also have space flight, and will enjoy the companionship of the Space People. When Earth has risen to this height of advancement space flight will become a common thing, and Earth's people will then perhaps go out and serve other less fortunate planets, just as the Space People are serving Earth now.

     There are only a few more things I would like to mention and they are concerning a question which has been asked of us. A few months ago Betty and I announced that we were publicly withdrawing from actively speaking. But since that time an erroneous idea has sprung up that perhaps we had been shut-up by the Three Men in Black. We would like to clarify this, for we have not been visited by anyone who threatened us, and we were temporarily withdrawing from the saucer field for personal reasons. These reasons were due to certain changes we were going to make, and one was due to the fact that I was going to leave for France. However, different plans have been formed and I am not going to leave for France; therefore, we will be available at times for lectures and speeches.

When Helen and I made our Preparations to go to a UFO convention we felt It would be interesting to get as much direct Information as we could from the Space Brothers, so when we contacted them we asked if there were any definite statements they had to give us. We received a lot of information from the M-4 Section on Mars and Helen presented it in her earlier comments (above), but we also contacted the Planet Venus and received much interesting information from a Venusian called Tregon. I would like to read his message for you, which we received just a few days before we came down here, so without any further comment at this time I will quote the message from Tregon of Venus:

     "Often the revised facts of Earth's history come to our attention, for the credibility of the human mind is filled with much misrepresentations. As our sciences developed on Venus we were able to devise machines capable of picking up the past actions of history and by a series of transformers create the scenes and sounds of unforgotten history. Many scenes that have been completed on Planet Earth have been viewed, and it is with understanding that we realize the means of recording for Earthman were inadequate. Barriers of language and habits prevent the Interpreters from knowing what ancient man meant by his words and phrases which he left as a record of his deeds and actions. Languages that have long since ceased being spoken or learned create much of the present man's difficulty in comprehending what his ancestors meant by certain symbols and figures. The present stage of man cannot possibly know what was in the thoughts of the ancient man, who left as a record chipped symbols and signs upon rock and marble. The dead languages of the past create the insurmountable barrier, for it was thus the purpose and plan of the Creator to prevent the understanding of certain tribes. When the decree was given to have the tribes split and the languages differ upon Earth it was for the purpose of veiling the darkness from the untrained mind of the evolving souls living on Earth. Thus the sealing up of ignorance and the fallen angels began.

     "As history proceeded the decrees of those possessing the wisdom of darkness grew until they recorded much false history that glorified their deeds. The sons and daughters of man had learned the wisdom of entering heaven, but falsely used the illumination they gained and instead of living according to the proper laws they built and obtained material creations to satisfy their bodies. Thus the spiritual advancement of man was prevented from properly developing, and the decree of severance and chaotic thought filled the Earth. Much time passed before this was completed, for it was from Venus that the messengers came to start these changes. Changes came and flooded the Earth and the separation of people began. Through these many years the Greek civilization came arid passed, leaving it's imprint with the only means of communication known then, but those of different language found they could not comprehend what the ultimate motive for certain symbols was and as the vast civilization of the Greeks fell into obscurity so, too, did the true meaning of  their records. Roman history came also and then left, along with the Egyptian rulers and people; but none of this history is known today in it's true sense. The language barriers are definite and profoundly confusing to the minds of man who tries to surmount them. Earth man was thus protected from himself by this severance of language, for the wisdom of some historical periods and people would have been destructive. Those people who came to Earth, being sent by the Creator in His wisdom, served to prolong the advancement of man and his material creations, for it was known that Earth man could create anything then that his imagination would reveal.

     "Earth man had reached an evolutionary cycle where he responded to the intellectual flash of creation that was born from his mind. He could see mental images of vast material creations inspired by the elevation of his thoughts, and in disobedience to his spiritual growth he sought to satisfy this and create similar effects. Knowing the effect this would have upon the development of his mind the messengers of Venus came to prevent the destructibility of man. The True Creator was no longer exemplified in man's mind, for it became filled with the material wonders devised in his imagination. The centuries of advancement that Venus had, before, Earth knew the trend of man's feet, placed her people in a position to see the evil that Earth was committing. Those wicked people who, during the rise of Earth's own civilizations, had been cast down to Earth were creating monarchies of slavery of Earthman.

 

     "This time in Earth's history was during the Atlantean period, and the separation of Earthman's minds was decreed to take place. Those from Venus came, and gave warning to the faithful of Earth, who, unlike the other Atlanteans, followed the laws of the Most High. The story of a man called Noah, in your Holy Book, was one of the faithful who survived this cleansing of Earth. Those unfaithful of Earth who followed the fallen angels were deprived of their powers to control by the division of the Universal Tongue. No longer could one language be understood by another, for the different ones of faith who were saved created various dialects and interpretations at the guidance of the messengers.

     "As a means of preserving their might and power the Atlanteans wrote upon stone tablets and inlaid their writings in marble slabs thinking men in the future would look upon his recordings and wonder at their power. Now, their magnificent temples and homes lay beneath the ocean in obscurity, lost forever to the minds of man. The tongues of the Earth are many and varied, for not even two people of the same tongue use exactly the same phrases. It is possible for those of the same tongue to understand each other's ideas and words, but when one interprets the language of another into their .language some of the true meaning is .lost. This is the diversion of the tribes of man as decreed by the Creator. In the age of the Atlanteans the evils of Earth were ri1ultiplied by the Evil ones who fled from the exploded planet called Lucifer, and who created the same evil on Earth as they had created on their planet. False worships grew and multiplied on Earth at their direction, and the fallen angels of Lucifer lead astray many of Earth's inhabitants. Seeing this, the wise ones of Venus came to Earth in their craft. Earthmen called these craft "fiery-chariots," and a "wheel inside a wheel," another name given to the craft of Venus by Earthmen has been a "cloud."

     "The years of Atlantis saw a growth of intelligent comprehension in man, and it was through this growth that man's eyes became open to the evils around him. He no longer lived in a world of innocence and obedience, but the people began to follow the evil influences that the fallen ones of heaven had brought with them. Earth was then polluted, and as a new cycle of change in the heavens began the wise ones of Venus came to Earth to warn all to repent, but many did not follow their guidance. Being wholly instructed by the Most High Council the Venusians who came to Earth told the faithful to leave for certain areas, and thus the Bible tells of only the one story of a man called Noah, who with his family built a means of sustaining the change which was to come to Earth. The wicked and evil ones died in the axis change and cataclysms that occurred, while the faithful were saved by proper warning according to the order of the Most High.

     "Again now, we watch Earth follow the path of Atlantis. Terrible releasing of energy in bombs is making your Earth a place of desolution. Plants and animals are being scourged by it, and soon even the water will become undrinkable due to the radioactivity of these bomb releases. Our help can only come after a certain length of time has elapsed from the one cataclysm to the next. We can offer our warnings, and guide those who are faithful to certain areas, but we can not ourselves move to stop the tests of the bombs. Earthman brings upon himself unnecessary tribulation. The question of another major war is asked many times by Earth people, and we say that there must not be another war. The Truth in your Holy Book will come to pass, for we see again the evil works Earth does and the Most High Council can rule at any time upon the necessary actions. We repeat, we cannot intervene in your bomb tests, for the will of Earthman must be fulfilled; so, too, must the Law and if  such evil actions of man do not change we will lift the chosen people to watch from afar the rest of Earth's woes. Let those who have ears to hear, let them hear." Signed, Tregon of Venus.

     I have a few comments to make concerning this message from Tregon of Venus, for I was very much interested in knowing of the rise of Earth's earlier civilizations, particularly the Atlantean. Many people have asked us of this phase in Earth's history and so it was natural that we would prefer to obtain the Space Brothers' opinion. So many really important facts are contained in Tregon's words that I would like to draw your attention to a few in particular.

     At the first of his message he said, ". . . the human mind is filled with much misrepresentation." Then he went on to say how false history is accredited to this misrepresentation, and he explained why this came about. We all know that many of the facts in our history books are based only on a few records and that these could have been hurriedly and falsely written or transcribed. The plain truth that any of the ancient languages cannot be completely understood today is due to the fact that the human mind is divided in it's wisdom, and that certain knowledge then, does not prevail today. Therefore the present mind cannot possibly understand all the phrases and written symbols that the ancients tried to reveal in their records. Our explorers and archaeologists are now finding and uncovering strange records and symbols that they cannot decipher. A language of symbols was the only way to record the Universal Tongue. The people of ancient Atlantis spoke the Universal Tongue, and as we recall in the message of Tregon, he said that due to evil acts the people and tribes of Atlantis were split and I quote his words, ". . .it was thus the purpose and plan of the Creator to prevent the understanding of certain tribes." We learned that the fallen angels were the beings who lived on the planet Lucifer, that once was in an orbit between Mars and Jupiter, and that these evil beings fell to Earth after refusing to accept the word of the Most High Council. We can understand why these beings were considered as angels and why they are considered as falling from heaven to Earth. At the time of Atlantis the beings upon the planet Lucifer were extremely advanced and possessed Space flight and wisdom that Earth man does not yet even know. They were thus advanced far beyond the modern men of Earth, and were indeed possessors of rare wisdom.

     Their fall occurred when they disobeyed the Most High and continued with devastating experiments that caused their planet to be exploded. Thus cast out by the Most High and the other angels they descended to earth where they were forced to rebuild and start a new. They had lost a vast and beauteous planet, and thus fell to the early civilizations that Earth possessed at that time. They continued their evil on Atlantis and when the Angels in heaven saw this they were commanded by the Most High to cause this to cease by scattering the people and dividing the language, so the evil ideas of the fallen ones would not be understood. When the messengers from Venus arrived to start the work of the Most High, Tregon tells us that, ". . . the sealing up of ignorance and fallen angels began."

     Since the space people of Venus did instruct and guide the faithful people of Earth to sacred places where they would be safe when certain changes took place, we know that they will again do this at the proper time. Our scientists know that there are cycles of activity that Earth passes through and Tregon also said in his message that ". . .as a new cycle of change in the heavens began the wise ones of Venus came to Earth to warn all to repent." The people of Venus knew of the inevitable axis change that was to bring a flood and cataclysms to Earth. The faithful were warned and only those who were full of obedience to the Most High received the warnings and instructions. Thus Earth was cleansed and the evil ones with their records and language sank with Atlantis and other continents, while the faithful were saved.

     We find the space people are now prepared to again warn those who are faithful and to show them sacred ground to go to, also to lift them from the face of Earth itself and protect them from the radioactivity and evil of those who do not follow the laws of .the Most High. Our Space Brother has said, ". . . Let those who have ears to hear, let them hear." Tregon has told us that the evil of Earth will continue until the planets and oceans are radioactive unless Earthman puts a stop to this evil.

   

     The space people cannot intervene, nor cause all the A and H bombs to become inactive, for they, too, are held in a certain status until the time comes when the Most High issues a decree of action for Earth. No doubt they have the wisdom and means of making all the storage of bombs inactive, but they will not or can not interfere unless the order is given by the Most High. The Brothers have told us before that the evil ones of Atlantis were experimenting with energy releases that our scientists are playing with today in the A and H bomb experiments, and that due to this they brought about the axis change more quickly than the natural change would have been. He has told us the tribulations of Earth could be brought about too quickly, for an axis change is coming and if left unhampered it will be natural and slow; but if the explosion of bombs continues it could bring about this axis change too quickly and cause cataclysms.

     Many times the enthusiast asks us, "Why don't the Space People just come down and take over? Earth would be better off." But Tregon has answered that question, and until Earth is again ready for the natural axis change they will only issue warnings and perhaps take the faithful up to the far heavens where they will wait the final cleansing of Earth's surface.

   

     The problem of flying saucers has become very deeply interwoven with the fate of Earth, and none who investigates the phenomena can come out of it without sensing the complexity of the solution. No one can give a definite account of all the Space people's purposes, but we can share the information we do get and piece together the intricate puzzle of what they are, why they come to Earth, and how Earth is being benefited by them. To the faithful who keep the Laws of the Most High we can only phrase the words that so often come to our minds, ". . .rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your reward in heaven. . . . "
Beginning a series of revelations concerning what is going forward in the activities of those not at this time encased in mortal flesh and those who are, or will be, their associates on the earthplane. Thy friends in the Unseen be possessed of bodies more amenable to transposition from one phase of manifestation to another (as water may manifest as steam, as snow, as ice and so on, depending on atmospheric conditions, natural or artificial.) This doth greatly enhance their ability to aid mortals at this time.

Pardon the diversion! Be ye interested in concrete facts deduced from acute sensitivity to present conditions and their inevitable consequences. As hath been said, the precise moment of Divine Intervention doth depend absolutely upon Man's reaction to tests imposed, not by thy Heavenly Father or His obedient emissaries, but by the dupes of the Enemy.

As ye do at times forget, the warfare doth rage upon the astral planes simultaneously with its progress on the earthplane. The mere fact that so many thousands have been "killed" doth not conclude the matter in any wise. THEY STILL LIVE! Thus

p. 22

our problem is to segregate them, not as to earthly categories but in accord with our innate purposes and desires. Naturally, this doth greatly complicate the task of those whose responsibility it be to resolve the whole matter into its basic constituents.

With regard to thine own country, which be destined to act as a "spring-board" from which to extend real aid to other lands, the present distressing exhibition of preposterous antagonism to well-planned, inherently just and legally sanctioned procedures to rid the administrative branches of the government of utterly subversive and traitorous incumbents cannot be tolerated. As dastardly plots of the enemy are exposed to view, it be for the American people to choose whether to cast their lot with the Christ forces or the renegades. There be no middle ground . . . to remain neutral be the most despicable crime of all.

Ye do deplore the lapse of time, yet of what consequence be the amount of time consumed, compared with the self-exposure of criminals posing as benefactors of the human race? Presently many millions of souls will be following a pathway of ever progressive evolution, or doomed to tread the downward path of misery and degradation. Is it not worth the price of a few lagging months of desperate conflict twixt Darkness and Light, twixt vicious Hatred and superhuman Courage to make certain every mortal

p. 23

now living is in his or her rightful place? Not in accord with some arbitrary law or human decision but according to the unerring knowledge and wisdom of Him who doth see and judge the inmost secrets and hidden motives of man's hearts?

I say, it will be settled, not by any natural advantage of superior numbers or the use of weapons devised by scientists who have (or think they have) contacted and harnessed the secret powers of Universal Energy. I SAY, NOT SO! It will be brought to an abrupt and incontrovertible conclusion by "AN ACT OF GOD" comparable to none heretofore known to mortals. This planet be not caught in a net of inextricable difficulties but be emerging from its super-imposed domination by semi-demonic demagogues leading to its destruction. It be placing its trust in the only Power able to deliver it from its impending fate.

I say to thee in all sacred solemnity of pronouncement, THIS THY COUNTRY SHALL BE SAVED AS BY A MIRACLE! I say not it will be a peaceful deliverance but through the unfaltering loyalty of millions who place their faith in thy Master, the Christ of God, this land will be cleansed from the abominations now infesting it. It shall be the center from which shall issue those injunctions and powerful energies which shall lead the world into an intense,

p. 24

burning desire to know and to do the Will of the Lord God of All Creation, as revealed by their coming King, who shall reign over this regenerated world without hindrance from those who now harass and seek to destroy His faithful servants.

Before any appreciable gain can be made by earthly representatives of thy Master's coming kingdom, there must come the downfall of vast numbers of bombastic declaimers of their own inflated belief in their own importance and influence over the people. Assent gained through fear or force melts to nothingness when assailed by cold logic or intense loyalty to higher concepts!

A long and arduous warfare hath been waged against "the powers of darkness" impinging upon all earth's inhabitants from invisible citadels where Lucifer long reigned supreme over his vassals (invisible to mortals) assigning them to tasks of fiendish ingenuity to entrap and inveigle human beings into abject slavery to his demands.

By reason of the unremitting diligence of those to whom was relegated the apprehension and elimination of countless millions of demoniacs and demoniacally controlled entities, sworn to obey the edits of their overlord, Lucifer—I say, as a result of this uninterrupted campaign on the astral planes, it now be possible to transfer this battle to the physical

p. 26

plane and repeat the process where mortals may more effectively join in the conflict and observe greater tangible results.

As it doth rage on the physical plane, there be three types of weapons to be employed. First: the actual material armaments necessary for defense purposes. Second: the mental agility to recognize and combat delusive propaganda. Third: the spiritual awareness and moral stamina to move steadily forward, in defiance of all enemy resistance, to establish and maintain a rigorous regime of honest government in every phase of human affairs.

Ye may say the present deplorable condition of earthly affairs hath always existed and always will. I SAY NAY! Through man's willful disobedience it hath reached a point where his own most determined efforts to remove the accumulated incubus of overwhelming pressure from subversive forces be well-nigh futile.

Divine intervention (operating through chosen emissaries endowed with power and authority to abolish the hellish system in force when Lucifer and his minions held sway) hath prevailed upon invisible planes adjoining the earth and the roving hordes of diabolical perverters of unresisting mortals be either removed or under control.

Now cometh the final stage in this stupendous project. Not without physical discomfort and suffering

p. 27

may the victory be won. Mortals must prove their mettle. Ye may look upon this time of tribulation as a bitter and unwarranted trespass on thy right to lead a life of honor and dignity. Even so! Yet it doth afford thee a glorious opportunity to show thyselves (sic—JBH) worthy to participate in the responsibilities as well as the privileges of the "Golden Age." Privileges forever denied those now responsible for retarding its inauguration.

No matter how previous be the suffering of many mortals in this final phase in the transformation of thy world, all who will stand firm in their defense of the Right (on whatever battlefield they fight) will soon realize that they have rendered a priceless service to their Master and his conquering legions from outer space, now able to traverse the hitherto impenetrable density of earth's auric envelope and bring succor and strength to the Christ Forces in mortal flesh.

A change cometh swiftly over the face of the earth and the peoples residing thereon. Hour by hour the forces of evil themselves disclose their dire purposes. Close upon the heels of these disclosures come the rapidly maturing decisions of the Enlightened Ones now dwelling in fleshly bodies, to reverse the edicts of false leaders and substitute their own true concepts of constructive action to insure the survival of desperately beleaguered followers of One sent to teach men the Way of Life!

I salute You from Schare! A few further words of explanation regarding our presence and purpose. At the request of your Heavenly Father, we come to assist your Unseen Guardians who are greatly perturbed over the state of your planet Shan. We come ten million strong with a full complement of appliances and all necessary forces of an etheric nature to use in any manner deemed expedient to block the designs of destructive forces or render their weapons innocuous. We realize certain portions of earthly terrain are marked for destruction. In pursuance of this program, we withhold interference when so instructed by the Hierarchy in uninterrupted touch with the Father of us all. When certain prearranged signals are received, we send thousands of ventlas to places where dangerous conditions exist.

Perhaps, you will more readily comprehend our mission of merciful protection when I tell you countless instances of planned sabotage have gone awry owing to the vigilance and prompt action of our men. Destruction for destruction's sake is not our practice. A condition may be most distressing and

p. 29

call forth our earnest desire to render assistance, yet we are bound by the most sacred of vows to intervene only at the times and places indicated by our Master or His accredited lieutenants. Once given implicit instructions regarding a particular situation, we are then free to work out the minutiae of operations according to our best wisdom and skill. But there is never a moment when we may not confer with our Commander-in-Chief should we feel any doubt over some proposed step to be taken.

Our means of thought communication and visual observation of any person or place on the entire globe is beyond your present comprehension. It makes possible the fulfilling of a promise many times repeated, that all who put their trust in God will be Divinely protected under all circumstances. Your Heavenly Father uses His dedicated servants to carry out His will, choosing the ones best fitted to act in the various roles demanded in any crisis.

Our appearance in physical form or the materializing of the ships we use occur only on instructions from our Headquarters far above your bases in your stratosphere. They follow a predetermined schedule, not as your clocks and calendars but in conformity with carefully computed sequences of events depending largely on mortal reactions to each step in the program. Many factors enter into the decisions made, such as planetary influences of a magnetic

p. 30

type, astral conditions, the activity of forces concealed within the earth body, constantly changing vibratory rates in different sections of the globe owing to the people's awakening to their perils and desperate attempts to extricate themselves. This latter consideration is perhaps the most potent point in releasing our forces in their behalf. They must themselves instigate the attempt to gain their freedom before we can go to their rescue.

Of course, we fully sympathize with your interest in the mechanical construction and motive power used to achieve the feats of apparent wizardry which mark our arrival in your material world. Even though we may, for some specific purpose, invite you for a ride, it will be impossible for you to ferret out our secret of propulsion, since you have rejected opportunities afforded you to become acquainted with laws governing these higher forms of energy. Such knowledge has been prostituted for illicit purposes of destruction, in the past.

Not until your world has dispensed with all need for destructive weapons and all desire to misuse the finer forces of this God-governed Universe, will you be permitted to experiment with ever-existent etheric energies holding magic possibilities for those qualified to employ them as intended by the Creator to whom they owe their existence.

p. 31

We come now as Liberators but look forward to a more joyous mission, when we will mingle freely with you and gladly initiate you into many delights and privileges we possess. May we count on your cooperation in bringing that happy time very near? We hope so! My love and my blessings!

I AM ASHTAR

My message concerns a number of erroneous claims being made by those who crave personal publicity. Any one who may attempt to invest us with powers of divination and announce themselves the recipients of information pertaining to the private affairs of individuals (unless they apply specifically to serious national or international matters) are guilty of falsification. Only insofar as they affect our plans (which must of necessity depend to a considerable extent on the understanding and cooperation of dwellers on your planet) will we pay any attention to your own purely personal problems by prying into the future for answers to your queries.

Our interest lies in two directions: Providing the facilities (unknown to your inhabitants) to prevent a wanton waste of life through the reckless employment of inconceivably powerful forces for destructive purposes . . . forces intended for constructive and creative purposes only! And, with our better comprehension of the principles involved both in producing and directing such intensive energies, to transmit (at the appointed time) to those proven trustworthy, the knowledge of a practical nature which we possess

p. 33

in regard to these forces. At present, anything we might add to the sum total of earthly achievement along scientific lines, would naturally be directed to warlike operations. We must first assist in the abolition of existing agencies bent on world domination BY FORCE! A planet populated by fear-driven slaves in the power of a mere handful of tyrannical (May I inquire what is the polite synonym for "bullies") rulers, would not even interest us!

Having held numerous consultations with the honorable gentlemen responsible for the founding of this country, our indignation has been aroused by the manner in which their noble visions of Freedom, Industry and Progress have lost the luster of their original inspiration and deteriorated into a dingy counterfeit of the original heroic model held before the eyes of the people. At that time much assistance of an amazing type was given at crucial moments. Inspiration and the courage and determination to follow these magnificent ideals, called forth overwhelming response from Watchers in Unseen Realms. Had they not been carrying forward God's Plan, depending on His guidance and His help, no such country as America would now exist!

I confine my remarks to this land for the obvious reason that it is here that a stand must be taken to rescue this precious and priceless IDEAL from extinction! Should this country succumb to the pressures

p. 34

now being brought to bear to submerge it in a World-wide flood of ANTI-GOD villainy, where might FREEDOM find a lodging place?

The combined forces of Space Men (assigned to canvass the entire global situation and submit a workable plan for the rescue of those being rapidly drawn into a tightening net of infamy) are united in what we believe to be the only means of handling this grave problem. Naturally, we do not propose to confine our efforts to this country, by any means. There are others in far greater need of immediate aid, being in many places, suffering hideous injustice and cruelty.

Before going further, I wish to make it crystal clear that we work at all times under the direct supervision of your future Ruler, the Christ.

NOW—What we ask you to do is to lend credence to our "reality" and our entirely impersonal desire to be of service! The sooner these two facts are accepted by people generally, the more quickly and easily shall we be able to achieve our goal and the fewer lives will be lost in the process. We are admonished to save every soul who will gladly adapt to the glorious transformation scheduled for the NEW AGE! Some may be removed from your planet to help for a time from planes invisible, as many thousands are now doing. I am referring to

p. 35

great many arrivals on the astral planes and a great many others, dating back to your beloved Washington, the immortal Lincoln and other men of their caliber.

We are submitting our plans to the HIGHEST COURT OF HEAVEN for approval and we look forward with confidence to your whole-hearted cooperation!
All honor to all those who, through divinely inspired intuition, have grasped the true meaning of our mission . . . who have not attributed our various manifestations to any base or selfish motives on our part.

Any attempt to acquire anything we find of value on the planet SHAN would be but the grossest act of robbery and utterly inexcusable, since your inhabitants as a whole possess at this time a supply pitifully inadequate to provide your population with the barest necessities for physical existence. We plan to add to your resources . . . not subtract!

It is not my purpose to call your attention to the causes for this ghastly reversal of all Universal Creative Laws designed to prevent any such dilemma. What very few of even your most advanced thinkers and philosophers appear to fully realize is the fact that innumerable purely material blessings naturally follow in the wake of a strict observance of these Universal Laws.

Even your own beloved Master, the Christ, did not formulate these Laws during his earthly tenure in a

p. 37

physical body. They had existed from the beginning of creation. They were a part of the creative process! They still are of the very essence of ALL creative process! Refuse to follow them and you invite destruction, as is self-evident in all we see of misery, want and degradation on your planet today.

The contrast between conditions prevailing on our own well-ordered planets and the chaotic disorder everywhere apparent as we observe life as now lived on the planet Shan, is painful in the extreme to contemplate.

On this account we do the more earnestly commend the heroic attempts by many enlightened mortals to rectify the blunders, as well as the purposely subversive activities of vast multitudes operating in direct opposition to the most obvious dictates of their own good judgment, did they but apply their mental machinery (however "rusty" it has become) to the discovery of the basic causes of your present difficulties.

Your planet was given a rare opportunity to learn the true and dependable Laws leading to progress along all lines of achievement . . . physical, mental and spiritual . . . when the One known to you as Jesus Christ was sent in human embodiment, not only to teach but to demonstrate in full sight of earth dwellers, the Beauty, the Efficacy and the Supreme

p. 38

[paragraph continues] Wisdom of compliance with those powerful Creative Laws enunciated by the Omnipotent Creator of All Things!

This advent of The Christ occurred at what seems to us a very short time ago and many of us watched with fascinated eyes and the most intense desire and hope, to see this Saviour of mankind accepted and acclaimed Ruler of the Planet Shan by unanimous consent!

Alas! The failure of all but a mere handful of people to catch even a fleeting glimpse of the sublime spiritual message He brought, which would have freed them from all bondage to material things . . . their complete BLINDNESS . . . filled our hearts with sorrowful despair of any possible chance for Shan to be saved from total destruction.

I say, we who watched from our posts of observation in space, lost all hope of ever seeing your planet rescued from the fate it had brought upon itself. And so our interest waned. Except for an occasional visit of compassionate scrutiny, we consigned your planet to oblivion as far as we, personally, were concerned.

Not so your Redeemer! He had made a sacred promise to those who believed and trusted Him implicitly. To them He said He would return in power and great glory, and this dark orb would be illumined in spite of all efforts of the Dark Ones to prevent it from happening.

p. 39

We come now in full confidence that this promise is to be kept. We have been summoned to assist in the fulfilling of this promise. Knowing from long experience the manifold joys and satisfactions which will be yours when you are released from all those who hold you captive to their evil wills, we come with an excess of enthusiasm to lend our support to this crusade. Yet we hold ourselves subject at all times to the All-wise supervision of our Supreme Commander.

May we all band together in a divinely blessed fellowship and lend our utmost effort to serve well and faithfully until the GLORIOUS VICTORY IS WON and the planet Shan is at last a Shining Orb in the firmament of the heavens.

My Love! A S H T A R

NOTE . . . At the present time there need be no special effort made to communicate with us except at our special request. We ourselves will choose the time, place and person we desire to contact. However, it will be of immense assistance if you will maintain a feeling of friendly interest and confidence in us and, in your mind, hold a thought of welcome. Our forces find such an atmosphere well adapted to their work, as they need these "Lighted Landing Fields" where they may pause for a moment or two and adapt themselves to the conditions and vibrations

p. 40

they must encounter in fulfilling their various assignments.

We know each one who is in sympathy with our mission and we would like you to know what a help it is to have these luminous avenues through which to reach the darker areas where much of our work must be carried on.

We are deeply grateful for your understanding and your welcome!
By reason of the fast approaching climax in the age-old antipathy twixt two totally opposed basic Life Principles, it doth become necessary to provide more than human wisdom, strength and skill to overcome the heavy onslaught of misguided or purposely destructive forces.

Whether this assistance cometh in visible aircraft manned by powerful beings endowed with authority to use forces unknown to mortals, or whether the necessary aid be given in ways mysterious and intangible, of a surety men and women fulfilling the missions which brought them to earth at this time shall be given all they need to guarantee their success in carrying out their destined roles.

None may compute the wondrous patience and forbearance wherewith thy Heavenly Father hath borne with the frailties of human beings! None may even faintly surmise His disappointment at their refusal to accept His overtures of Forgiveness and Mercy! All which cometh to pass of a destructive nature be the result of men's free choice of the Pathway

p. 42

of Retrogression, which leadeth to oblivion as far as their residence on this planet be concerned.

THESE RETROGRESSIVES CANNOT EXIST
IN THE NEW WORLD NOW BEING
CREATED!

A failure to bring about the establishing of this long-heralded "Kingdom of Heaven on earth" cannot be even remotely considered! Thy Master said, "My Kingdom is not of this world." Yea! But was it not also writ, "Behold, I make all things new?" "A new heaven and a new earth" wherein shall dwell righteousness! This be His promise! It be now in process of fulfillment!

Think ye the Creator, whom the most ignorant concede hath power to intelligently construct the globe ye now inhabit, be not able to re-construct it to conform with a program designed to give a regenerated human race the proper environment wherein to utilize newly apprehended forces requiring new conditions for their manifestation.

Ere the concluding contortions of terrestrial readjustments occur, ye may expect entirely unrelated, sporadic exhibitions by Nature, releasing long repressed accumulations of force sufficient to disrupt a mountain, flood a desert, sink a country or raise a continent. Not in a haphazard or irrational manner

p. 43

will these startling transpositions take place. They will follow a detailed plan of procedure whereby those areas best suited to the development of New Age projects will be spared or changed to render them fit for greater service to future inhabitants.

Any dissertation on future events must be received according to the knowledge and faith of the reader. A statement may be utter nonsense to thee today, yet a month hence appear in quite a different light. Let tolerance tincture thy criticism of aught which seemeth to verge on the fantastic. If ye are to be advised of miracles to be achieved during the coming months, then must ye admit to thy minds new concepts of Nature's part in this metamorphosis.

A plethora of cleverly concocted substitutes for Nature's originally perfect provision of foods containing all elements needful for man's sustenance have flooded thy markets. When correctly compounded by sincere scientists, we do not condemn their rightful use. Yet hath it deprived Nature of a responsibility she will again assume when changing conditions renew the impoverished soil upon which she hath been forced to depend for essential ingredients to instill life-giving and preserving elements into the matchless array of edibles she doth produce.

Be not fearful lest the earth be denuded of its fields of golden grain, its wealth of fruit-laden trees,

p. 44

its vineyards of luscious grapes, its expanses of greenest verdure producing all the vegetables one could desire. These and countless other bounteous provisions for the temporal needs of all God's little children of the earth shall thrive in the freshly vitalized ground which shall respond to Nature's alchemy.

I HAVE SPOKEN! SO BE IT

Greetings From Your Friends of Station Share!

Would that I might personally greet each one of you openly avowed friends and express our appreciation of their kindly acceptance of the presence of those of us who come from "Outer Space" to aid the dwellers on the planet Shan!

However, since these friends now number so great a multitude and since "time" is of the essence of our present mission, we "Space Men" must confine our contacts to those occasions when something may be achieved which will in some way forward our objectives.

But I wish to make it clear to you that every new friend we acquire makes our mission a little easier and more effective.

It is not our purpose (as you have been advised) to "pounce down upon you" as it were, and intrude on your affairs in a thoroughly discourteous manner. Only in cases of unwarranted abuse of your newly

p. 45

discovered destructive powers will we feel justified in exercising our superior forces to circumvent their action, seeing it would jeopardize not only your own planet but many dwelling beyond the range of your vision. Other than this, our assistance will be supplementary.

When, through the dismissal of vagrant entities not entitled to the hospitality of your planet, we are able to mingle freely with you and give you our willing aid in re-vitalizing, beautifying and rendering your entire globe more tenable by progressive mortals . . . we can then express in practical and visible ways our respect and admiration for those willing and eager to lend a hand in the transformation which is surely coming to the planet Shan!

Our sincere interest, sympathy and love to our friends and those who soon will become our friends!

There are a few suggestions I would like to make, in part to answer many inquiries by those serious in their wish to be of service in establishing the incoming "Kingdom of Heaven on Earth" and, therefore, desirous of giving us assistance in our initial efforts to awaken your people to the present peril.

While the cleansing process is unavoidable, as you well know, before a more perfect system can be evolved, there are many ways by which the discomforts and inconveniences of such a clearance of offensive debris can be lessened.

Whereas, in certain sections of the globe, nothing but a complete sweeping away of every vestige of ancient abominations and their residue will serve the purpose . . . there are countless instances where a determined effort by individuals, groups and organizations to raise their standards in conformity with well known principles of New Age living would obviate the necessity for such drastic measures.

p. 47

Consider for a moment if you will, the reasons for this type of disastrous occurrences. Your own history furnishes any number of examples of corruption which led to the downfall of nations or their burial in the ocean depths. Has virtuous and humane conduct ever been known to wreck a civilization?

We are nearing the season when the people of this nation observe a day of Thanksgiving. It would appear to be an appropriate time to consider the blessings for which there is reason to be thankful. They consist of a vast array of material possessions which add to your comfort and pleasures in varying degrees. No country in the world has more abundant cause for gratitude to the Giver of all Good Gifts! And yet, observing the thought-streams ascending from the mass mind of humanity, we find a great preponderance of dissatisfaction discoloring even the prayers of the people! True gratitude, where may it be found?

You rise up in protest saying, "How can we give thanks for all the terrible things which are being brought to light . . . the treachery, dishonesty, deceit and disloyalty to all which is right and just? Tell us that!" Why ask so inane a question? No one is asking you to say you are thankful for things of that sort! But have you thought to thank your Heavenly Father that they are being brought

p. 48

to light? To thank Him you are being shown so clearly the evils which must be abolished?

Do you recall learning the multiplication table? What has that to do with world conditions? I will tell you! It has never been denied that five and five make ten. Or that five times ten equals fifty! These are facts accepted in every country under the sun. On other planets also. You start with one, then you build up by addition or multiplication to a hundred, a thousand, a million! And on up. My suggestion is that you start with "one" . . . yourself! Four of our Space Men will join you in thanking God for your freedom to think and act honorably, truthfully, justly, loyally. Other mortals will join you . . . and with each one there comes the added force from our side . . . fourfold! No doubt, you and many others have done this, not realizing quite how much it meant in the conflict now going on.

We have traversed the length and breadth of this and other lands. We have found multitudes of fine, upright, generous-minded people. We have taken account of every one of them. We have watched them at home, in business, at work, at play, in fortune, in misfortune, in peaceful times, when disaster strikes! At all times they are calm, resourceful, lending courage and strength to the weak and fearful! We know thousands upon thousands of such men, women and children. We thank God for them!

p. 49

[paragraph continues] Were your whole world peopled with persons like them, what a Thanksgiving Day there would be!

Some think of us as "Destroyers!" Just sit down quietly for a few moments and think of all the things that make you anxious, afraid, unhappy, sorrowful! THESE ARE THE THINGS WE HAVE COME TO DESTROY! They have thrown everything out of balance, off their proper orbit! Yes, I mean physical things! The weather, the ocean tides, the air you breathe, the food you eat, the very earth on which you walk! They have affected all human relationships, business, government, commerce, society in general. They are the "intangibles" which permeate all existence and either destroy or create according to their character. (You know their names quite well! )

This coming Thanksgiving Day we from out of space join you in praising a beneficent Heavenly Father and His Beloved Son for every true, every beautiful creation of His which has not been distorted and rendered vicious by Man's misuse.

We join you in thanking Him that where you are caught in a trap and are not able to put into practice those good impulses and purposes you feel so strongly, He is sending mighty Forces to your rescue!

We join you in thanking Him that when this sad and distressful season of cleansing is over, we may

p. 50

confidently anticipate a joyous time of re-building, re-modeling, re-creating all things on this earth in perfect harmony and accord with the design and infinitely wise specifications of the Master Architect of the Universe!

To this glorious and sublime end we pledge our hearts, our minds and every power and skill we possess, till our sacred mission is completed!

We thank God our mutual success is assured and we shall see our Beloved Master, the Christ of God crowned King of Kings!

Unto Him be honor, praise and glory now and forevermore!

ASHTAR AND HIS ASSOCIATES
from Venus and neighboring planets in loving cooperation with all friends on the planet Shan.

A Simple Word of Warmest Greeting to All My Friends whom I Reach through this Contact Point: I join with you in honoring One who almost two millenniums ago, as you reckon time, humbled Himself and entered an earthly existence as an ordinary mortal. Needless to comment that I had known Him previous to this incarnation and had held Him in deepest reverence and adoration. How it was possible for any man, woman or child to become acquainted with Him and fail to give Him the warmest

p. 51

devotion of their hearts is a mystery too deep for me to fathom.

And so today, it is with joy in my own heart that I behold the ever widening array of those who truly worship Him, whatever their own particular form of religious observance may be.

Our Forces on Schare will join you with one accord as you endeavor to give expression to the honor due Him.

May you be granted a new and glorified vision of His majestic grandeur and absolute simplicity of speech and bearing and . . . Oh, that you might know the depth of His compassion for the erring children of the planet Shan!

To you who love Him, I can only say, "Did you but know Him as I do, you would love Him more . . . MUCH MORE!

While in a sense each morning marks the beginning of "a new day" . . . yet, as this last year has sounded the death knell of an era disastrous to the welfare and happiness of mankind in many ways, so the New Year just dawning promises an epoch of unparalleled enlightenment and opportunity for mankind to recoup his losses suffered through ignorance, or willful and deliberate substitution of man's base desires and destructive will for the Divine Will and Perfect Plan of God, his Creator!

Wearily have the days dragged by, while plots and counter plots complicated and multiplied man's unsolvable problems. We have watched with a horror impossible to repress, man's ineffectual attempts to extricate himself from the treacherous quicksands of deceptive "agreements" accepted in apparent good faith, only to be ruthlessly trampled under foot when their evil purpose has been achieved.

p. 53

Why do we say the tide has now turned? Because all mankind . . . enslaved or still capable of recovering their lost heritage of freedom . . . begin to see for themselves the enormity of their folly in transgressing laws all-powerful to promote their personal progress and consequent possession of all they most earnestly need and desire!

When will Man cease his ridiculous attempts to obstruct the orderly processes of progressive development as set in motion at the commencement of his sojourn on the planet Shan? The answer is absurdly simple! When he acknowledges to himself that his puny brain and unruly impulses constitute no reliable guide to the acquisition of those tangible and intangible assets without which he cannot hope to escape a most terrifying fate! Might we, whom you have named "Space Men," share with you the actual, provable facts we have been able to discover by experiment and experience in taking precisely the opposite course of action to that followed by the majority of earth dwellers?

Not but what there have been numerous rash attempts made by incautious believers in Divine Intelligence, Wisdom and Creative Ingenuity to align their lives with this supreme triumvirate . . . but to what avail? Mankind in general would have none of them! Their fate is all too well known to you! Shall we share that fate? NO!

p. 54

It is our avowed intention to acquaint you with the results obtained through the consistent and persistent use in a constructive way of the very forces you have used to destroy everything good and beautiful . . . and now insanely plan to employ to commit suicide on a global scale!

Our homes are built to provide comforts quite beyond your dreams of luxury unattainable! Their care is a delight, for there is no drudgery! Entertaining guests is robbed of all its problems save the pleasure of devising fresh plans for their enjoyment. (I might add they enter into all such plans with zest!)

All our educational facilities are entirely free, and so varied are the branches of study and practical application that no student has ever failed to find precisely the type of instruction best suited to his particular bent and ability.

Prisons, reform schools, institutes for the insane (yes, even hospitals) are unknown. They would be unoccupied.

Have these and innumerable other "wonders" come about through some sort of magic? By no means! We have worked them out! Where did we get our instructions? From the selfsame Source which is available to you.

I will tell you more should you care to know.

Ere we proceed with other aspects of New Age Progress, we will spend a little time considering the necessary changes to be made in the habits of a majority of mortals, so that they may make the best possible use of new forces released for their benefit.

We will liken the physical body of Man to a plant which doth draw to itself and absorb into its growing organism the precise elements vital to its expanding life principle. If it doth fail to contact what it needeth in its quest for self-expression, it doth soon sicken and die.

As of the time of this writing ( January, 1955) earth's atmospheric envelope be impregnated with many deleterious elements inimical to the health and development of any human body, particularly one delicately attuned to high vibrational frequencies. Such an one must be constantly safe-guarded against these infringing constituents of the very air they must breathe to sustain life. Not alone the air but the seldom recognized subversive thought streams, betimes well-nigh flood the mental atmosphere and drown out the more sensitive upward-reaching ten-drills of hope and faith.

p. 56

To counteract these and other dangerous deterrents to Man's wholesome life both physical and spiritual, certain purifying processes be constantly employed by the Invisible Guardians of the planet, else would ye perish. Ye have observed what ye call an "electric storm" with its pyrotechnical display of lightning, and have noted the ensuing freshening of the atmosphere, making it a pleasure to draw in deep draughts of purified air. This be but one of countless artifices contrived to lessen the dangers lurking in the ether about thee. Other threats to thy health of body and mind (for they be woven together like the woof and warp of a fabric) be not so easily apprehended.

But this we would indelibly impress upon thy minds! A perfect provision hath been made for thine every need under any and ail circumstances. Even in this transition period when ye do encounter many unaccustomed difficulties, ye have but to ask for Divine assistance to do the will of the Heavenly Father and, often in strange and unexpected ways, help will come.

Refuse to accept the ultimatum of Discouragement and defeat urged upon thee by evil forces rampant at this time. Pin thy faith to the redemptive forces sent of thy Heavenly Father to rescue thee from thy perilous position. As an airplane doth utilize the "fuel" provided to furnish the power it

p. 57

must have, that it may soar far above the sordid environment of a material world, so do thou avail thyself of the means provided for thy flight into the pure atmosphere of Divine replenishment.

Once thou hast contacted these currents of Cosmic Energy penetrating with ever increasing potency the finer, etheric Life Force all about thee, no heavy, clogging earth vibrations can hold thee in thralldom to disease of body, mind or spirit.

Until the Day of the Great Illumination, there will unavoidably be a struggle to attain and maintain at all times content and perfect attunement with this Divine Source of Life and Love Triumphant! Yet, herein doth lie thy freedom from the fretting exigencies arising from incessant friction twixt the fast receding customs and systems of a decadent and expiring age and that glorious New Age of unexplored marvels along every line of constructive and progressive effort.

Entirely new and fascinating possibilities beckon the dauntless explorer qualified to be the recipient of astounding new inspirations and powers ready and waiting to be bestowed upon him, after the necessary cleansing of thy planet be concluded, permitting the full influx of marvelous dynamics hitherto undreamed-of by the most imaginative of scientists.

p. 58

GREETINGS FROM OUTER SPACE

A further word of information for those eager to hear of a state of development not yet reached by your most venturesome and fearless explorers into the vast universe of inexhaustible possibilities along every line of progressive evolution.

We would make it clear at the outset that we are not seeking to "convert" you to any formula of religious concept, other than the simplest precepts laid down by the Divine Master, the Christ of God. Many of these same principles were enunciated by inspired men, saints and seers, sent of God down through the ages. When the people of Shan refused to accept their teachings and put them into practice, they left your earth and transferred their efforts to more receptive minds and hearts on other planes and planets.

Whether you choose to accept my statement or not, it is a fact that there are no "closed doors" between those who temporarily reside on any plane or planet, unless through sheer stupidity, ignorance or absurd and unfounded fear you yourselves close and lock the door. Quite true, the "open doorway" must always be guarded by strong forces to prevent the

p. 59

entrance of unwelcome visitors. As you know, these guards are provided on request.

But to return to the more "practical" aspects of progressed living conditions as enjoyed by the citizens of Venus, and similarly enlightened planets:

As the entire environment and the atmosphere itself has become saturated with thoughts and emotional vibrations conducive to clear mental concepts and high ideals, you can easily understand that our problems of behavior are practically non-existent or, at least, reduced to a minimum. No one on any level of mortal existence (and we are mortals in a very real sense) enjoys being looked down upon by his fellows. Even a criminal aspires to be a sort of "super-criminal."

Thus it is that having established certain "codes of honor" in our everyday living and finding it a definitely enjoyable way of life, it seldom occurs to the youth of our planet to look for their pleasure in unprofitable pursuits. Actually they are too busy seeking to excel in their own chosen profession or avocation! Frequent "tests" are held . . . you would, perhaps, call them "Fairs" . . . where many exhibits are on display and trophies awarded for unusual skill, originality and dexterity gas demonstrated mechanically, artistically, mentally or along any line of constructive effort to reach a high and ever higher

p. 60

goal of perfection, with suitable recognition of each evidence of progress made, often works wonders with those inclined to lag behind. We keep a personal televised record of the progress of every student enrolled in our schools. Thus, they compete with their own past achievements, as well as with others in approximately the same category.

With what you term "The younger generation" reared in this manner, you will readily comprehend the way in which they are enabled to apply the principles and utilize the essential etheric properties contained in the super-charged magnetic orbit which surrounds our home planet. An absurd theory exists in the minds of some earth people we have observed that the type of existence we have attained must be slightly insipid and monotonous. Nothing could be farther from the truth! Our lives are fairly teeming with ever-expanding interest and activities! You have a trifling example of my meaning in the constant improvements made in your automobiles and household appliances. Even their method of propulsion is constantly subject to revision. Then, why doubt or wonder that, on a planet where war has long since been abolished and all diabolically destructive practices are unknown, we have evolved a system of Self-government which fosters individual initiative contributing to an Over-all Plan whereby each community forms a perfectly coordinating unit in an

p. 61

ever progressing planet of magnificent achievement and surpassing beauty. Our knowledge, our skill, our equipment and power to use it, all are at your service as you prove yourselves willing to learn and abide by Cosmic Laws which we obey.

In the Name of our beloved Commander-in-Chief, Jesus Christ, we bless you and give you our love!

My word this day pertains to a subject of major importance: namely, the mission of what ye have erroneously called "Flying Saucers" and their occupants.

Our desire is to have them recognized as speedily as possible as direct emissaries from more advanced planets, coming at the behest of an Hierarchy governing this entire Universe; therefore, responsible for the continued existence of the more worthy specimens of the human race living on the planet Shan. (The Earth)

By reason of gross stupidity and ignorance of their superior powers, men have cast a pall of doubt and distrust about this entire controversy over the reality and purpose of these Men from Outer Space.

Since they be not subject to the whims of any who would capture, imprison and condemn them to torture in a vain attempt to force them to divulge their secret source of power, they cannot and will not be balked in their mission.

p. 63

Ashtar will reveal further details of their heaven-appointed mission to mankind at his discretion. I Have Spoken!

AMEN!          SO BE IT!

GREETINGS FROM ASHTAR AND
HIS FLYING LEGIONS!

Before writing a short resume of what we have to accomplish within a very short time, I wish to make doubly sure that everyone reading my statements shall thoroughly understand and accept my sworn affidavit that we "Space Men" have nothing—ABSOLUTELY NOTHING—to gain personally by this tedious and difficult task to which we have dedicated ourselves for as long as it may take to bring it to a successful conclusion.

Our only reward will be the satisfaction anyone feels in achieving a praiseworthy goal. Perhaps I Should add, the supreme pleasure of knowing we have played honorably our role in the forthcoming illumination of this entire globe, that your Master may assume His Sovereignship over a world completely renovated and restored to its original beauty, and even more than that, as men comprehend their privileges in the New Regime we shall assist in bringing into operation.

p. 64

Is it not to YOUR ADVANTAGE to accept our aid? To augment and amplify our efforts some very fine, brilliant men are doing this very thing! This gives us the incentive we need to continue our attempts to gain the confidence and cooperation of all persons of intelligence and integrity.

The method I am employing at the moment may merely arouse your curiosity. But we feel it will take the widest possible variety of manifestations to converge and provide proof sufficiently convincing to permit us to carry out our plans without devastating interference. Devastating not to us but to the very ones we are sent to rescue.

Much as we would like to tell you otherwise, Truth compels us to warn you the situation is serious!

BE LOGICAL! BE COURAGEOUS! Above all, obey one of Nature's most insistent laws—the Law of Self-Preservation!

WE ARE HERE TO HELP! Give us a hand, won't you?
A definite change has come over the minds and hearts of many people in this and, to a lesser extent, other countries. Where, heretofore they viewed the appearance of ourselves in our Space Ships in the light of a curious phenomenon to be regarded with suspicion or shrugged off as irrelevant to current affairs, they are now seriously weighing our possible involvement in any coming conflict.

I am taking this means to advise you that most assuredly we shall intervene to protect this or any country on the planet Shan which places its trust in God Almighty and His Son who is His personal representative on this globe.

We have been asked to explain the type of cooperation we ask of you. The following suggestions may furnish a clue to our needs. Others will occur to you as you ponder upon the situation in your locality.

Acquire as much information as possible from all reliable sources, refusing to give credence to any doubts cast upon our sincerity and our ability to carry out orders we receive from our Commander-in-Chief.

p. 66

Without being obtrusively insistent, pass on such information through every channel open to you. It is imperative that the public be alerted to our presence and its purpose. We might remark that treating it as "news" rather than placing it in a religious category would avoid disapproval in some quarters.

Use the telephone, private correspondence and casual conversations with friends, or even strangers, to promote a wholesome interest in the subject . . . tactfully leaving the impression that to deny our existence or doubt our friendly purpose is out of date.

Encourage the forming of space clubs or small groups to meet at stated intervals for discussion of the latest news available.

Stress the fact that our first urgent objective must be the removal of the causes necessitating illegitimate use of newly apprehended forces capable of completely disintegrating this planet and doing irreparable damage to all forms of living substance in close proximity thereto. We know the extremity reached in the downward course of power-crazed potentates! Under no other circumstances would we have been entreated to undertake our present mission or empowered to intervene and prevent the extermination of the inhabitants of Shan.

As the opportunity occurs, let your friends know we do not come as adventurers seeking excitement, nor

p. 67

as scientists in quest of fresh knowledge! What could we learn in your laboratories with their passé equipment, or what satisfaction find in the hurly-burly of senseless clashes in mental or physical arenas of action?

Perhaps it would be well to again emphasize the fact that your inmost thoughts and desires, as well as your acts, create either a very real barrier, or point of contact, according as you reject our way of life (based on the true Christ Principles) or harmonize with our concept of constructive and progressive living. We have passed through a long and tedious process of re-appraisal and re-evaluation of all Life has to offer in the final analysis, since first we were favored with wise and patient Teachers from "Outer Space."

What they did for us ages ago, we now offer to do for you! It is against every tenet in our code of honor to attempt to force you to accept our services in the capacity of Teachers. Yet this I can promise in all sincerity! Should our offer of genuine, practical assistance be welcome and the necessary preliminary steps be taken, we can and will joyfully pass on to you the knowledge we possess. Not only will we do this, but we will "loan" you many of our most expert and experienced teachers in every branch of art and industry to initiate you into the secrets we have tried out and proven one hundred percent effective in

p. 68

creating a world of incredible beauty and endless delight.

Until you have attained some reasonable concept of such a planet and such a life, I fear it would be unwise to extend to you an invitation to visit us in my home on Venus!
We will continue our description of life on Venus, as a fitting prelude to our well earned privilege of serving in our present capacity . . . not technically designated as "teachers" but more in the role of "elder brothers," guiding, encouraging and commending any forward step, as our comrades of earth fall into line with our steady march toward our goal . . . the acceptance of our Beloved Commander-in-Chief, Jesus Christ, as Ruler of Shan (planet earth)! Until he mounts his rightful throne of Power and Glory, and is accepted by mankind in a true spirit of loyalty and devotion, we are bound by our sacred word of honor to serve in any way which will speed that denouement.

Let us, then, proceed to our task of enlightening our friends on Shan as to some aspects of our accustomed mode of "home life," which has afforded us a maximum of physical delight (my scribe questions that term) but we do enjoy the sensory pleasures which you fear lost as you make the transition

p. 70

into what you have named the "Fourth Dimension." True, it takes a little preparation to enter into this higher vibrational environment and participate to the fullest extent in the rare privileges which are ours. However, I assure you without equivocation our joy in the satisfying of every desire (since we have learned the secret of desiring only what is for our highest good) goes so far beyond anything you have experienced in your present earth-life that we are at a loss to know how to employ phrases strong enough to make it real to you!

When you "hear" the full, complete harmony of a celestial orchestra or the crystal-clear tones of a heart-stirring melody sung by one you regard as angelic . . . when a fragrance of unforgettable sweetness is wafted to you from you know not where . . . when a mental vision is reflected from some entrancing beauty spot, perhaps on Venus itself .. . when there surges through your entire being ecstasy which sets your heart aglow with love for every creature, for every growing thing from tiniest blossom to towering monarch of the forest, for every mortal who worships the great Creator . . . when you enjoy the full flavor of a delectable contribution to your daily repast direct from Nature's matchless storehouse of edibles (unspoiled by man's tampering processes) . . . have you not had a tantalizing foretaste of the "sensory pleasures" which many earth

p. 71

people imagine they must forego upon leaving their earth home which has yielded them all too scanty a portion of genuine pleasure?

Yet it is an undeniable fact that we retain, in amplified, intensified form suited to our more sensitized capacity for enjoyment, all you have found truly pleasurable in your "material existence" as you call it. We hear and are especially susceptible to aromas . . . though we have none offensive to our sensitive nostrils. We have clarity of vision, extending to realms hidden from your eyes, no matter how expert your oculist may be! Our sense of touch is delicately adjusted to objects cast in a more etheric mold than those you encounter, and more easily shattered. In fact, they may be altered or even obliterated by the power of thought alone (which might be considered a desirable achievement in the case of decrepit bits of furnishings I have observed, especially in what you name your "attics"?)

Please! I have the greatest possible respect and admiration for anyone who makes the best of their possessions however crude . . . but I was thinking of what you often refer to as "trash" kept about for no good reason. I heartily concur in "C. N.'s" advice to "streamline your possessions."

I have not touched upon the more spiritual aspects of our lives, which to us are precious beyond all else.

p. 72

[paragraph continues] Our lives abound in an ever-expanding appreciation of blessings accruing from a free expression of our highest aspirations. We shall try to take you further into our confidence and our plans for your happiness when next we chat with you. Until then, my love and my warmest gratitude for your assurances of your confidence and affection, received by mail and via "wireless!" Thank you and God bless you!

Unto each of thee I address these words of earthly usage, that they may be read and understood by thy conscious thinking processes, limited by previous thought patterns strongly etched on thy brain, which be the physical instrument wherewith thou dost interpret My thoughts in conformity with thy willingness to accept Divine Truth in its purity of concept.

At this culminating period of intense effort on the part of all Light Forces to enter every smallest opening in mortal minds and hearts with the illuminating power of Christ-Love, it be given Me, the Christ-of-God once manifesting in mortal form, to give every human being some glimpse of My glorified Being! Until the mass of mankind be brought to a point where they yearn exceedingly to know Me (or the spirit of Truth which motivates My every word and act) of what avail would be My manifestation in garb of flesh? Would it not be accredited by the majority of mankind to some absurd, theoretical

p. 74

fantasies invented by minds closed to inspired revelation of Truth?

Lo, ye do contradict thine own selves! One moment you pray for a visible demonstration of the reality of One sent into flesh nigh two thousand years agone, that thus thy faith may be justified. The next moment ye deride and scoff at anyone who tells thee of beings (not from highest heaven but from advanced planets more easily comprehensible to untutored, immature minds) sent of the Father to lead mankind to a partial understanding of the spiritual laws by which man may progress.

My words of Truth and Life have been discarded by the multitudes as "impractical," have been distorted, have been mouthed in "vain repetitions" until they have well-nigh lost their power to reach men's souls, have been relegated to the realm of childish fondness for pleasing tales, oft cast aside as they grow to maturity. Think these be fitting preparations for My manifestation in mortal guise?

Oh, my little children of earth, list not to those who prate of vast stores of knowledge to be acquired through years of arduous study of ponderous tomes designed to confuse thy minds and divert thee from the simple, direct pathway leading to true companionship with thy Master in thy daily thinking and living! One Truth lived each hour of every day in

p. 75

conscious attunement with thy Master and thy Heavenly Father doth bring Me closer to thee than endless hours of reasoning about this or that theory concerning Life and its purpose.

To see Me with thy physical eyes would be to thee a boon beyond price, and this shall not be denied thee . . . yet will ye hasten the time of its occurring if ye will but behold Me in My spirit manifestation walking by thy side wherever duty calleth thee, revealing unto thee through our close understanding in what wise ye may best fulfill the tasks allotted to thee ere ye embarked upon thy present earth span.

Many now reading My written words be here as "ambassadors" from far flung vistas of "outer space," having volunteered to endure the irritations of fleshly existence that they might in some wise aid in turning men's minds toward a Christly mode of living. Unto these consecrated ones I say, "Lo, I shall give unto thee, mayhap in a way ye be not expecting, a true vision of thy Master and His boundless love for thee!"

Wouldst thou choose to see Me clothed in radiance of glory so dazzling you could not approach Me in thine earthly habiliments? Or may I come unto thee in seamless robe of perfect understanding of thine own earthly circumstances and problems?

Choose thee the latter, I pray thee, and in due season thy faithful service, performed in My Name

p. 76

and by My Power, shall lead thee to the hour appointed by our Heavenly Father when thou shalt see thy Master face-to-face!

Lo, this shall be thine own "Easter Morning" of never-ending, joyous recognition of thine ever present Friend and Counselor,

THY PRINCE OF PEACE

p. 77

ASHTAR SENDS AN EASTER GREETING

What could a mere "Space Man" add to our Master's Easter Message which would not detract from the beautiful simplicity of His words? We, who come as Messengers and Deliverers from the "powers of Darkness" now encompassing your planet, beseech you to heed the note of warning concealed in this Easter Message and "step up" all your own vibrations to a level where you can bear the radiance streaming from the glorified Cross, which is the symbol of our Risen Lord, forever freed from the limitations of earth life.

It was said of old, "When He shall appear, we shall be like Him for we shall see Him as He is!" I wish to assure you, this is literally true as we have proven, for as we visualized the Divine purity of His Life and Teachings, as we made our lives conform with that inspired vision, we reached a point in our understanding where we were able to "see Him," not only with our spiritual eyes but with the sensitized lenses of our physical eyes until now, I can tell you in all truthfulness, we enjoy the almost inconceivable privilege of entertaining Him on many occasions when He visits Venus!

p. 78

Some of you may question this saying, "The Christ Spirit is indwelling in each of us!" This we gladly concede is true! And this Christ Spirit manifests in many guises on all planes and planets. The Spirit of Kindness, of Compassion, of Mercy, of Joy, of Beauty, of Love in all its multitudinous forms . . . all of these are reflections of the Christ Spirit which our Master so magnificently presented for our emulation during His sojourn on Shan (the earth).

Each mortal seeking to follow in His footsteps acts as a magnet to draw to earth those qualified to assist in restoring that perfection of both material and spiritual beauty it originally possessed in the Mind of the Creator! It is our great privilege to aid in this restoration under the direction of our Master and yours, Jesus the Christ!

A glorious Easter to you in which we shall share, with all the hosts of heaven rejoicing at your response to the Call . . . "Come up higher!"

Were it possible for thee to see with thy physical eyes (or to retain in thy physical brain the memory of) scenes at this moment taking place on astral planes in close proximity to the earth plane, then would ye be relieved of much of thy burden of anxiety concerning the outcome of violent clashes now occurring within sight and sound of thine eyes and ears, as of thy conscious knowledge.

Soon thy superconscious mind will release to thee faint glimmerings of changes even now in preparation on the earth. Yea of a truth, they come into manifestation first upon the astral planes before materializing in earthly form through strange diversities of circumstance. Those most strenuously opposing their advent, do frequently act (quite unwittingly) as their strongest proponents. Seeing the frightful ravages wrought by devotees of diabolical dogmas, many turn away and apply themselves to plans for their eradication. In this effort they will receive superhuman assistance.

Following the demolition of destructive agencies, animate and inanimate, ye will concede the obvious

p. 80

need for a well implemented program devised to fire the imagination and arouse the aspirations of every member of the human family, in accord with their own individual ability to contribute to the Over-all Plan! Every faculty possessed by mortals may be fitted into the mosaic of New Age activities. In this way those formerly suffering frustration and defeat will feel a new surge of confidence in their competence to follow their clearly indicated aptitude for certain types of service in research, invention, mechanical skill, or whatever their talent may be, to a successful conclusion.

To this end hath it been ordained that many doors to knowledge hitherto barred to mortals, will be opened to those who through trials oft accounted unjust (and rightly so!) have, nevertheless, proven themselves to be worthy to receive the boon they long have sought. To them will be given the keys to mysteries long veiled from mortal eyes, awaiting the propitious time for their revealing.

Devious methods will be employed for the transmission of what be to many startling new facts regarding invisible forces, extremely powerful and yet (how wisely!) impossible to contact, or even apprehend from an intellectual standpoint, save by one elevated to a high level of spiritual awareness of the inviolable sanctity of any knowledge touching on energies emanating from Divinity Itself!

p. 81

Not in any promiscuous and haphazard fashion will the requisite aids to the acquisition of such supernal knowledge be provided. Many factors will enter into the bestowal of such gifts, chief of which will be the character of the one in quest of any particular type of information, and his purpose. These qualifications may best be ascertained by a survey of his objectives and achievements in past incarnations. Such an inspection would necessarily be done by a very advanced mentor or specialist appointed for the task. The person whose past record be subjected to such scrutiny be not consulted or conscious of the procedure. We might interject the comment that many highly evolved men and women now on earth have undergone such an investigation and have been approved for admittance to the tutelage of adepts, awaiting only the moment of the world's emancipation from the domination of destructive forces to begin their collaborative work with their students. This active partnership between one in close touch with the material world and one in direct contact with supernal knowledge will be one of the major marvels of the New Age. The person privileged to enjoy such a partnership may not be conscious of such assistance but may attribute the sudden flashes of "inspiration" to intuition but will surely recognize it as coming from a source higher than their own mind.

p. 82

However, it may be said in passing, that in almost every instance there will eventually evolve so close a companionship that it will be possible for the two co-workers to "visit" back and forth, from the Fourth to the Third Dimension at will, much to their mutual advantage and enjoyment!

AMEN! SO BE IT!      

p. 83

A FRIENDLY MESSAGE FROM ASHTAR

Another link has been forged between those residing upon your planet Shan and the galaxy of shining orbs (as you see them!) which compose the glittering firmament you see "above you." Actually, of course, it completely surrounds the globe whereon dwell those looking skyward at night-time from their particular section of the earth.

Oh, that all peoples could but realize how the encirclement by these illumined "stars" (no matter how far distant they may be as of earthly computation) provides the ultimate evidence that this "dark planet" may in time reach a similar stage of evolution, unless man himself decrees otherwise!

Could this fact be brought home to them, then would they accept a kindly word of counsel from the inhabitants of these and other progressed spheres and greatly profit by their proven knowledge of the beneficent action of universal Cosmic Laws, when correctly employed in a constructive manner.

Much has been written of late concerning certain visible contacts made by Space Men, or "Etherians," with inhabitants of Shan (the earth) residing in different areas of the planet. Their conversation is

p. 84

often alluded to as being carried on by "thought transference" or through the use of telepathy.

This brings to light a possibility given little consideration by those in quest of further information regarding any who have observed flying "unidentified objects" at incredible rates of speed. So impregnated have their minds become with thoughts of invasion by enemy forces (seen or unseen) that they reject the idea of a peaceful "invasion" or visitation by friendly neighbors wishing to courteously welcome them into the cooperative fraternity of constellations of celestial bodies peopled by those enjoying a type of intensely interesting existence impossible of attainment save by those who live in accord with Cosmic Law.

It is our desire to attract your attention and invite your confidence through visible manifestations of various kinds. However, do not for one moment conclude that this is our chief objective. God forbid!

Our revered and Beloved Jesus. the Christ, did "many mighty works" when He lived as a man among mortals, yet His real mission was to teach men the meaning of Life, both here and hereafter.

And so we rejoice that our vital mission to Shan is being recognized by many who meet and talk with us during the hours when their physical bodies are wrapped in slumber. The ideas, the truths, disclosed in these nocturnal conferences are stored in their.

p. 85

superconscious minds and our new friends later work them into the patterns of their daily lives.

As a matter of fact, it is of far more practical assistance in hastening the planet's delayed illumination, to change the "thought-currents" into the right channels, than it is for us to transmit knowledge of a scientific nature. Science perverted to destructive purposes, acts as a deadly menace!

Science directed into channels of dynamic activity which will lift the human race to a new, a higher type of existence in accord with its God-designed destiny, will bring into reality that Golden Age now dawning on the consciousness of all awakened souls. Our newly consummated contact with such souls is of profound significance to us and promises to play a major role in the emancipation of Shan from the domination of utterly subversive forces whether visible or invisible!

We pledge you our whole-hearted support in each and every constructive effort in every field of endeavor looking toward the illumination of your spirits, minds . . . yes, and the very earth on which your feet tread!

May our mission to Shan be blessed with a speedy success by the Father of us all and His Beloved Son, Jesus the Christ!

speaking for a mighty army of Space Men now in active service.

Although the scientific discoveries and inventions of the New Age will cause endless amazement and discussion over the new methods introduced, a much more important phase will radically change all of man's relations with his fellowmen.

We speak of the "lectures" (if ye would so name them) which will be given in all parts of the world upon any subject pertinent to that particular section and the inhabitants thereof. These demonstrations of practical ways in which newly apprehended etheric forces may be utilized to lighten laborious tasks and increase the comfort and happiness of the so-called "common people" will be arranged by the leaders appointed. These special leaders will not be chosen by the people, since their duties will not be of a judiciary character. They will be persons of high intelligence and spiritual enlightenment, yet withal, keenly aware of the vital necessity for bringing these attributes into play in a realistic way, during the reconstruction period of the world's regeneration.

These leaders will make all arrangements for the addresses but they will not be the speakers. One of the very surprising incidents of the New Era will be the introduction of Teachers from the now "invisible" realms. These visiting instructors will be experts

p. 87

chosen for their intimate knowledge and experience along the various lines in which their audiences desire to excel. They will be garbed in accord with the customs of those who come to learn of them. They will speak their language. It will not be some "foreigner" intruding to instruct in the use of strange new implements and stranger modes of dress and behavior. It will be like one of their very own people pointing out to them better ways of managing their own affairs, that they may minimize and finally abolish evils long existent. Little by little, through their own efforts, in response to suggestions given, their entire mode of living will be elevated to a higher standard than they have ever known.

I speak not of deliberately retrogressive nations. They will no longer cumber the earth. Those of whom I speak are inherently honest and honorable members of the human race who have been repressed and retarded, not of their own volition but through forced subjection to men more powerful and aggressive but far less amenable to higher instruction and consequent progress. They will soon emerge from the apathy induced by domination to the point of slavery, and their minds once awakened will eagerly accept and put into actual practice the principles explained and new methods applicable to their daily tasks. By utilizing "moving pictures" (taken on other planets) demonstrating these improved techniques

p. 88

within the compass of their understanding, then patiently answering questions regarding the use of unfamiliar implements, they will readily respond and cooperate.

We use these downtrodden people to illustrate this system of teaching. By "importing" speakers from high planes and other planets to give detailed instructions on a multitude of different topics, fully illustrated, desired changes in customs and general behavior of the populace will be quickly achieved.

The very novelty of such an experience will lend interest and there will be a certain prestige attached to adopting the advice of these adepts from hitherto unknown sections of the Universe. Even the simplest of counsel will acquire fresh significance when given by so distinguished a coterie of speakers! This plan will augment and greatly simplify the work of those mortals who will be called upon to conduct classes for the enlightenment of willing but ignorant aspirants wishing to qualify for New Age Living.

None will be asked to sit in any dark and poorly ventilated room to meet these guests from realms long regarded as invisible. Nay, they will appear among ye as well attired as thyselves (sic—JBH) and ye will so welcome them, with unaffected cordiality!

This be a most pleasant occurrence to contemplate and it shall surely come to pass! It is plainly depicted on the Screen of Things-to-Come! Amen! So be it!

A most gratifying change is now taking place in the general attitude of the people of Shan (the earth). No longer do great masses of the inhabitants of this and other countries, regard our super-powered airships as monstrosities threatening their safety of body and property but adopt a more sane and cooperative course of action, showing willingness to give us the benefits of a doubt as to our intentions.

We cannot but feel somewhat amused at times over the pride exhibited by those who have succeeded in registering undecipherable squeaks and whistling sounds on their poorly constructed receiving instruments! Were they familiar with the forces we employ in sending these signals (which are not, in most instances, intended to be translated into the language of any particular country) we could soon devise a method of communication satisfactory to everyone concerned. I speak of a mechanism. As the matter now stands, it is we who must acquaint ourselves with the curious combinations of sounds transmitting to your minds the ideas to be conveyed. These vary so completely in different sections of the globe as to present quite a problem to our men. Were you conversant

p. 90

with the art of thought transference, as we know and practice it, our friendly intercourse would lose much of its present difficulty and become a pleasing possibility. Our use of this type of "conversation" has been developed over uncounted ages of constant practice. When we employ your method of using appropriate words to convey our meaning, it is to us as tedious as if you had to spell aloud (or write) each word you wished to speak, which you would find quite tiresome . . . the latter often necessary in talking with the deaf. Thus (not intending any disrespect) we must perforce regard earth dwellers somewhat in the light of "deaf people" who must be reached through the medium of sight.

We ourselves have to a great extent dispensed with sound, so many noises to which you are accustomed (therefore do not seem annoying) are to our sensitized ears almost "deafening" as you would express it. You marvel that our Space Ships operate noiselessly; that we appear and disappear without the least sound, or at most a "swishing sound" caused by contact with your dense atmosphere.

Can you not understand we must learn to do what we have in mind, using the crude elements at your disposal, since you have little or no knowledge of the existence of forces we find so perfectly suited to our purposes? We fully realize how impossible it is for you to duplicate our accustomed modes of procedure

p. 91

in all the practical details of our ordinary daily lives, with your present limited "laboratory" of etheric essences suited only to the present atmospheric conditions surrounding your planet.

And so, my friends, we are forced to acquaint ourselves with your irksome limitations and adapt ourselves to your rather trying conditions, atmospherically and in many other ways, that we may be able to render the assistance asked of us in the present transition of your darkened planet into an orb of shining splendor!

That this transition must take place simultaneously on the material, the mental and the soul levels (irrespective of purely religious concepts), poses many seemingly insurmountable difficulties.

That which cannot, because of its very nature, or will not, by reason of man's free choice, be transmuted into a higher rate of vibration . . . must through "Natural Laws" (similar to the familiar Law of Gravitation) sink to a level disassociating it from that portion of the earth and its inhabitants capable of rising to a finer type of existence, compatible with the vastly accelerated (or "quickened" since it is more alive) condition in which you will soon find yourselves!

If you are able to visualize such a marvelously, joyously "revised edition" of your present doleful life in toto . . . then I greet you as future residents of the New World in a New Age!
ON Friday the 23rd of June, 1634, about three o'clock in the afternoon, the Bishop of Poitiers and M. de Laubardemont being present, Grandier was brought from his prison to the Church of Ste. Croix in his parish, to be present at the exorcisms. All the possessed were there likewise. And as the accused and his partisans declared that the possessions were mere impostures, he was ordered to be himself the exorcist, and the stole was presented to him. He could not refuse, and therefore, taking the stole and the ritual, he received the pastoral benediction, and after the Veni Creator had been sung, commenced the exorcism in the usual form. But where he should haughtily have given commands to the demon, instead of saying Impero, I

p. 6

command, he said, Cogor vos, that is, I am constrained by you. The Bishop sharply reprimanded him, and as he had said that some of the possessed understood Latin, he was allowed to interrogate in Greek. At the same time, the demon cried out by the mouth of Sister Clara: "Eh! speak Greek, or any language you like; I will answer." At these words, he became confused, and could not say anything more.

To behave thus, or to acknowledge the truth of the accusation, is one and the same thing, but other circumstances strengthened this certainty.

Any man whose own writing testifies against him is lost. Now this is what Grandier experienced. The devils, in several instances, confessed four pacts he had entered into.

This word, Pact, is somewhat equivocal. It may mean either the document by which a man gives himself to the devil, or the physical symbols, whose application will produce some particular effects in consequence of the pact. Here is an example of each case. Grandier's pact, or magical characters, whereby he gave himself to Beelzebub, was as follows:—"My Lord and Master, Lucifer, I recognise you as my God, and promise to serve you all my life. I renounce every other God, Jesus Christ, and all other Saints; the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, its Sacraments, with all prayers that may be said for me; and I

p. 7

promise to do all the evil I can. I renounce the holy oil and the water of baptism, together with all the merits of Jesus Christ and his Saints; and should I fail to serve and adore you, and do homage to you thrice daily, I abandon to you my life as your due."

These characters were recognised as being in Grandier's own hand.

Now here is a specimen of the other kind of pact or magical charm. It was composed of the flesh of a child's heart, extracted in an assembly of magicians held at Orleans in 1631, of the ashes of a holy wafer that had been burnt, and of something else which the least straight-laced decency forbids me to name.

A most convincing proof of Grandier's guilt is that one of the devils declared he had marked him in two parts of his body. His eyes were bandaged and he was examined by eight doctors, who reported they had found two marks in each place; that they had inserted a needle to the depth of an inch without the criminal having felt it, and that no blood had been drawn. Now this is a roost decisive test. For however deeply a needle be buried in such marks no pain is caused, and no blood can be extracted when they are magical signs.

But if the devils, overcome by the exorcisms, at times gave evidence against the criminal, at

p. 8

others they seemed to conspire to blacken him still more under the semblance of an apparent justification. Thus several of the possessed spoke in his favour: and some even went so far as to confess that they had calumniated him. Indeed, the Mother Superior herself, one day when M. de Laubardemont was in the convent, stripped herself to her shift, and, with a rope round her neck and a candle in her hand, stood for two hours in the middle of the yard, although it was raining heavily; and when the door of the room in which M. de Laubardemont was seated, was opened, she threw herself on her knees before him, declaring she repented of the crime she had committed in accusing Grandier, who was innocent. She then withdrew and fastened the rope to a tree in the garden, attempting to hang herself, but was prevented by the other nuns.

When the devil played these kind of tricks they forced him to retract, by calling on him to take Jesus Christ present in the Eucharist as witness of the truth of his statement, which he never dared to do.

What criminals could ever be condemned if such proofs were not deemed sufficient? The certainty of the possessions; the depositions of two priests who accused him of sacrilege; those of the nuns, declaring that they saw him day and night for four months, though the gates of the

p. 9

convent were kept locked; the two women who bore witness that he offered to make one of them Princess of the Magicians; the evidence of sixty other witnesses; his own embarrassment and confusion on so many occasions; the disappearance of his three brothers, who had fled and were never seen again; his pact and the magic characters that were afterwards burnt with him: all these placed his guilt beyond doubt.

The trial being completed, and the magician duly convicted, there only remained to sentence the evil doer. The Commissioners assembled at the Carmelite Convent, and it was noticed that there was not the slightest difference of opinion among all the fourteen judges, though they had never seen or known one another. They were all agreed as to the penalty to be inflicted, and having pronounced their sentence, they were filled with joy and their conscience was perfectly at rest. It was as if God, whose honour was so interested in this affair, had intended to give them this consolation.

No one among the Catholics, or, indeed, among all honest men, failed to applaud the sentence on Grandier. It was as follows:—

"We have declared, and declare the said Urbain Grandier attainted and convicted of the crimes of magic, maleficence

p. 10

and possession occurring through his act, in the persons of certain Ursuline Nuns of this town of Loudun, and other women; together with other crimes resulting therefrom. For reparation whereof we have condemned, and do condemn, the said Grandier to make 'amende honorable' bareheaded, a rope round his neck, holding in his hand a burning torch of the weight of two pounds, before the principal gate of Saint Pierre du Marché, and before that of Saint Ursula of the said town; and there, on his knees, to ask pardon of God, the King, and Justice, and that done, to be led to the public square of Sainte Croix, to be there tied to a stake, which for that purpose shall be erected in the said square, and his body to be there burnt with the pacts and magical inscriptions now in custody of the Court, together with the manuscript book written by him against the celibacy of priests, and his ashes to be scattered to the wind. We have declared all his

p. 11

property forfeited and confiscated to the Crown, less a sum of 150 livres, which shall be expended in the purchase of a copper plate, on which shall be engraved the present sentence, and the same shall be placed in a prominent position in the said Church of St. Ursula, there to be preserved for ever. And before this present sentence shall be carried out, we order that the said Grandier shall be put to the question ordinary and extraordinary, to discover his accomplices.—Pronounced at Loudun on the said Grandier, and executed the 18th of August, 1634."

In execution of this sentence, he was taken to the Court of Justice of Loudun. His sentence having been read to him, he earnestly begged M. de Laubardemont and the other Commissioners to mitigate the rigour of their sentence. M. de Laubardemont replied that the only means of inducing the judges to moderate the penalties was to declare at once his accomplices, and by some act of repentance for his past crimes to implore Divine mercy. The only answer he gave was,

p. 12

that he had no accomplices, which was false; for there is no magician but must be accompanied by others.

For the last forty days the Commissioner had placed at his side two monks to convert him. But all was in vain. Nothing could touch this hardened sinner. It is true, however, that the conversion of a magician is so rare an occurrence that it must be placed in the rank of miracles. "I am not astonished," says one who was present, "at his impenitence, nor at his refusing to acknowledge himself guilty of magic, both under torture and at his execution, for it is known that magicians promise the devil never to confess this crime, and he in return hardens their heart, so that they go to their death stupid and altogether insensible to their misfortunes." Before being put to the torture, the prisoner was addressed by Father Lactance, a man of great faith, chosen by the Bishop of Poitiers to exorcise the instruments of torture, as is always done in the case of magicians, in order to induce him to repent. Every one shed tears except the prisoner. M. de Laubardemont also spoke to him, together with the Lieutenant Criminel of Orleans, but, notwithstanding their efforts, they made no impression. This determined M. de Laubardemont to try the effects of torture. The boots * were applied, and the judge

p. 13

repeated his questions as to his accomplices. He always replied that he was no magician; though he had committed greater crimes than that. Questioned as to what crimes, he replied, crimes of human frailty, and added, that were he guilty of magic, he would be less ashamed of that than of his other crimes. This speech was ridiculous, especially in the mouth of a priest, who must know better than a layman that of all crimes the greatest is that of sorcery.

p. 14

Torture drew from him nothing but cries, or rather sighs from the depth of his bosom, unaccompanied by tears, though the exorcist had abjured him, according to the ritual, to weep if he were innocent, but if guilty to remain tearless. Though he was very thirsty, he several times refused to drink holy water when presented to him. At length, pressed to drink, he took a. few drops, with glaring eyes and a horrible look on his face. Never in the greatest agony of torture did he mention the name of Jesus Christ or of the Holy Virgin, save when repeating words he was ordered to speak, and then only in so cold a manner, and with such constraint, that he horrified the assistants. He never cast his eyes on the image of Christ, nor on that of the Virgin, which were opposite to him, and they were offered to ban in vain: whereupon the judges remonstrated with him. They were still more scandalised when they tried to make him say the prayer which every good Christian addresses to his guardian angel, especially in great extremities, and he said he did not know it. Such was his conduct under torture: in such a crisis every feeling of religion would be awakened in an ordinary man.

His legs were then washed and placed near the fire to restore circulation; he then began to talk to the guards, joking and laughing, and would

p. 15

have gone on had they allowed him. He spoke neither of receiving the sacrament of penitence nor of imploring God's pardon. They had given him for a confessor Father Archangel, who asked him if he did not wish to confess. He replied that he had done so the previous Tuesday, after which he sat down and dined with the same appetite as usual, drank three or four glasses of wine, and spoke of all kinds of things except of God. Instead of listening to what was said to him for the good of his soul, he made speeches he had prepared beforehand as if he were preaching. They consisted in complaints as to the pain in his legs, and of a feeling of chilliness about his head, in asking for something to drink or to eat, and in begging that he might not be burnt alive.

When he was carried to the Court-house, where the Holy Fathers began to prepare him for death, he pushed back with his hand a crucifix which was presented to him, and muttered between his teeth some words which were not heard. His guards, witnessing this action, were scandalised, and told the monk not to offer him the crucifix again since he rejected it. He recommended himself to no one's prayers, neither before nor during the execution of the sentence–only, as he passed through the streets, turning his head on one side and the other to see the people, it was noticed that he said twice, with an appearance of

p. 16

vanity, "Pray God for me," and that those to whom he spoke were Huguenots, among whom was an Apostate. The monk who was with him exhorted him to say, "Cor mundum crea in me, Deus." Grandier turned his back on him and said with contempt, "Cor mundum crea in me, Deus."

Having reached the place of execution, the fathers redoubled their charitable solicitude, and pressed him most earnestly to be converted to God at that moment, offered him the crucifix, and placed it over his mouth and on his chest, he never deigned to look at it, and once or twice even turned away; he shook his head when holy water was offered him. He seemed eager to end his days, and in haste to have the fire lighted, either because he expected not to feel it, or because he feared he might be weak enough to name his accomplices; or perhaps, as is believed, in fear lest pain should extract from him a renunciation of his master Lucifer. For the devil, to whom magicians give themselves body and soul, so thoroughly masters their mind that they fear him only, and expect and hope for nothing save from him. Therefore did Grandier protest, placing his hand on his heart that he would say no more than he had already said. At last, seeing them set fire to the faggots, he feared they did not intend to keep their promise to him, but wished

p. 17

to burn him alive, and uttered loud complaints-The executioner then advanced, as is always done, to strangle him; but the flames suddenly sprang up with such violence that the rope caught fire, and he fell alive among the burning faggots. Just before this a strange event happened. In the midst of this mass of people, notwithstanding the noise of so many voices and the efforts of the archers who shook their halberts in the air to frighten them, a flight of pigeons flew round and round the stake. Grandier's partisans, impudent to the end, said that these innocent birds came, in default of men, as witnesses of his innocence; others thought very differently, and said that it was a troop of demons who came, as sometimes happens on the death of great magicians, to assist at that of Grandier, whose scandalous impenitence certainly deserved to be honoured in this manner. His friends, however, called this hardness of heart constancy, and had his ashes collected as if they were relics, they who did not believe in such things, for the Huguenots looked upon him as one of themselves, especially when they noticed that he never called on the Virgin nor looked on the crucifix.

Thus did he close his criminal career by a death which horrified not only Catholics, but even the more honourable of the Calvinist party.

But the end of the magician was not the end of

p. 18

the effects of his sorcery; and the possessions, far from ceasing, as had been hoped, continued for a time. God permitted that a great number of those who had been connected with the affair should be more or less vexed by demons. The Civil Lieutenant, Louis Chauvet, was seized with such fear-that his mind gave way, and he never recovered. The Sieur Mannouri, the Surgeon who had sounded the marks * which the devil had

p. 19

impressed on the magician priest, suffering from extraordinary troubles, was of course said by the p. 20 friends of Grandier to be the victim of remorse. Here are the particulars of the death of this Surgeon—

One night as he was returning about ten o'clock from visiting a sick man, walking with a friend, and accompanied by a man carrying a lantern, he cried all of a sudden, like a man awaking from a dream, "Ah! there is Grandier! what do you want?" At the same time he was seized with trembling. The two men took him back to his home, while he continued to talk to Grandier whom he thought he had before his eyes. He was put to bed filled with the same illusion, and shaking in every limb. He only lived a few days, during which his state never changed. He died believing the magician was still before him, and making efforts to keep him at arm's length.

Father Lactance, the worthy monk who had assisted the possessed in their sufferings, was himself attacked some time after the death of the priest. Feeling the first symptoms, he determined to go to Notre Dame des Ardilliers, whose chapel served by the priests of the oratory is held in great veneration in Saumur and its neighbourhood. M. de Canaye, who was going into the country, gave him a seat in his carriage. He had heard speak of his state, and knew that he was tormented by the devil, but he nevertheless joked about the matter, when, all of a sudden, whilst

p. 21

rolling along a perfectly level road, the carriage turned over with the wheels in the air without any one being in any way hurt. The next day they continued their voyage to Saumur when the carriage again turned over in the same way in the middle of the Rue du Faubourg de Fenet, which is perfectly smooth, and leads to the chapel of Ardillier. This holy monk afterwards experienced the greatest vexations from the demons, who at times deprived him of sight, and at times of memory; they produced in him violent fits of nausea, dulled his intelligence, and worried him in numerous ways. At length, after being tried by so many evils, God called him to Him.

Five years later, died of the same disease Father Tranquille. He was a holy monk, a celebrated preacher, gifted with a judicious mind, great piety, and a profound humility. A laborious exorcist, much feared by the devils, he had preferred that painful duty, generally little sought for, to the fame of preaching, and had devoted himself to the service of the possessed of Loudun. The demons, irritated at his constancy, determined to possess his body. But God never allowed him to be entirely possessed. Nevertheless, his cruel enemies succeeded in attacking his senses to a certain extent. They cast him to the ground, they cursed and swore out of his mouth, they caused him to put out his tongue and hiss

p. 22

like a serpent, they filled his mind with darkness, seemed to crush out his heart, and overwhelmed him with a thousand other torments.

On the day of Pentecoast they attacked bins more violently than ever, Ile was to have preached, but was too ill to attempt it. But his confessor ordered the devil to leave him at liberty, and commanded the father to ascend the pulpit. He did so, and preached more eloquently than if he had prepared his sermon for weeks. This was his last sermon.

He performed mass for two or three days more, and then took to his bed to rise no more. The demons caused him pains, the violence of which none knew but he; they shrieked and howled out of his mouth, but he remained clear headed. The following morning the monks saw that God had given rein to the powers of hell, and had determined to abandon to them the life of the monk; and he himself begged that Extreme Unction should be administered to him when they should see that he was passing away. About twelve o'clock a demon who was being exorcised declared that Father Tranquille was at his last gasp. They hastened to see if it were true; be was dying, so the sacrament was administered to him. He died, and received the crown he had gained by combats with hell so courageously sustained.

p. 23

The opinion of his holiness attracted an enormous crowd to his funeral. A Jesuit pronounced his funeral elogy, and a worthy epitaph was engraved on his tomb.

Another matter that should be mentioned is that when, Extreme Unction was administered to him, the devils, driven away by the sacrament, were forced to leave him. But they did not go far; for they entered the body of another excellent monk who was present, and whom they possessed henceforward. They vexed him at first by violent contortions and horrible howlings, and at the moment of Tranquille's death they cried horribly, "He is dead;" as if they would say, "It is all over, no more hope of this soul!" At the same time, casting themselves on the other monk, they worked him so horribly that, in spite of the many that held him, he kept kicking in the most violent manner towards the deceased. He had to be carried away.

Father Surin, a Jesuit, had succeeded Father Lactance; he too had his trials.

The demons used to threaten him out of the mouth of the Mother Superior, who was under his care. Once, in the presence of the Bishop of Nimes, the demon took up his position on the face of the nun; suddenly he disappeared and attacked the father, made him grow pale, sat on

p. 24

his chest, and stopped his voice; but soon, obeying the order of another exorcist, he returned to the nun, spoke through her mouth, and showed himself extremely hideous and horrible on her face; and the father, returning to the fight, continued his duties as if he had never been attacked. In one afternoon he was thus attacked and released seven or eight times; but these assaults were followed by others still more violent, so that in his exorcisms he seemed to be struck with violent interior blows, borne to earth, and violently shaken by his adversary; he remained in this state sometimes half an hour, sometimes an hour. The other exorcists applied the Holy Sacrament to the places where he felt the demons, sometimes to his chest, sometimes to his head. When the devil left him he reappeared on the face of the mother, where the monk, with holy vengeance, pursued him, and constrained him to adore the Holy Sacrament. Once the devil threw him out of a window on to the rock where stands the convent of the Jesuits, and broke one of his thighs. After having sustained during many years with perfect patience and resignation these terrible trials, he was freed from them, and at length died in the odour of sanctity.

As to the Mother Superior, towards the end of the year 1635, something happened to her of a

p. 25

most extraordinary nature. Lord Montague came to Loudun, accompanied by two other English noblemen. He brought the exorcists a letter from the Archbishop of Tours, ordering them to edify his Lordship as much as possible. The Superior, in the `midst of a convulsion, stretched out her left arm, and the name of Joseph appeared on it written in capital letters. The report of this event was signed by the English noblemen. Lord Montague hastened to Rome, abjured his heresy, embraced the ecclesiastical career, and, under another name, settled in France, where he lived many years. He is mentioned in the memoirs of Madame de Motteville.

At the beginning of 1636, on Twelfth Night, Father Surin resolved to compel the last demon that remained in the Mother Superior to adore Jesus Christ. He had the lady tied to a bench. The exorcisms drove the demon into a fury; and instead of obeying, he vomited a multitude of maledictions and blasphemies against the three persons of the Holy Trinity, against Jesus Christ, and against his Holy Mother, so execrable that one would he horrified to read them. The father knew that he was about to come out, and had the lady unbound. After tremblings, contortions, and horrible howlings, Father Surin pressed him more and more with the Holy Sacrament in his hand,

p. 26

and ordered him in Latin to write the name of Mary on the lady's hand. Raising her left arm into the air, the fiend redoubled his cries and howls, and in a last convulsion issued from the lady, leaving on her hand the holy name Maria, in letters so perfectly formed that no human hand could imitate them. The lady felt herself free and full of joy; and a Te Deum was sung in honour of the event.

Such is the true story of the possession of the nuns of Loudun and of the condemnation of Urbain Grandier, so different from the false accounts hitherto published. Even those who do not blush to deny the truth of infernal possessions need only notice that the human race has always believed, and still believes, that there are intelligent creatures in existence other than man, and almost similar to those whom the Pagans have always represented as Gods of Evil, or subterranean genii, like the demons believed in by Christians; and the belief in infernal possession, having in it no longer anything repugnant, will seem at once to them not only possible but probable. To believe that Urbain Grandier was unjustly condemned and executed, we must blindly believe hundreds of things which revolt common sense. One of the Protestant writers, for example, after having said in a thousand different ways

p. 27

that the possession of the nuns of Loudun was a mere imposture and horrible farce, confesses that it is impossible to conceive human beings, and especially women, driving a priest to a horrible death by such a series of feigned possessions.