I Am The One Who
Would Awaken You
A Selection from the Reality-Teaching
of His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

An excerpt from the book

The Ancient Walk-About Way

Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877-770-0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)
Learn more about Avatar Adi Da
at www.adidam.org

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

1

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
1.

T

he usual person thinks: "This body and its psyche are dying. This world is dying.
Everyone is suffering. Everyone is seeking. There is mortality. There is frustration and
limitation." But none of that is Truth. Those interpretations are not Truth. The world itself
is not Truth—nor is life, nor psyche and body, nor death, nor experience. No event is, in and of
itself, Truth. Everything that arises is an appearance to Consciousness Itself, a modification of
the Divine Conscious Light That Is Always Already the Case.
All of this is a dream, if you like. It is an appearance in Consciousness Itself. Truth Is
Very Consciousness Itself. Truth is to all of this what the waking state is to the dreaming state. If
you awaken, you do not have to do anything about the condition you may have suffered or
enjoyed in the dream state. What happened within the dream is suddenly not your present
condition. It is of no consequence any longer, once you are awake.
If you persist in dreaming, and your point of view remains that of the dreamer (and the
dreamer's role within the dream), then your possible actions are numberless. But none of them
will "work". They will simply occupy you in the dream. They will modify the dream state, but no
action in the dream is the equivalent of waking. There are simply forms of fascination, of
occupation, of seeking—until you wake up.
Truth is simply Waking, No-illusion. It is not a condition within this appearance. It has
nothing whatsoever to do with the mind, regardless of whether the mind is expanded or
contracted.
There is One Who is Wide Awake while He Appears in the dream. By not supporting the
dream, He Awakens others. He Is the True Divine Guru. I Am That One.
The significance of My Work is not in anything I do within the dream. I simply do not
support it. I do not live as it. I do not believe it. I do not take it seriously. Apparently, I can feel
and act as I please within the dream. I persist in the common (or ordinary) manner. But I do not
support the dream. I do not live from its "point of view". I do not live its structure to others. I do
not live the self-contraction to others—the avoidance of relationship, the separate-self-sense.
Simply because I live in this manner, those who are devotionally related to Me tend to
become Awake. But, while they are Awakening, they persist in dreaming to various degrees.
Forms of the dream persist. The search persists. Often, they get a little distance from the
dream—it seems to break up at times, seems to disappear. It becomes vague, it becomes
uninteresting, it becomes unserious, it becomes serious again.
You are just beginning to Awaken. Heart-Communion with Me is the dream in which I
Appear. Now it is as if you are beginning to wake up in your room. You are in bed, and it is
morning. There are a few things you begin to notice, which indicate that you are in another
state. Those who are Awakening in Truth begin to notice something. They begin to recognize
the signs. They begin to recognize the activity of dreaming. They begin to sense something very
unusual about Me.
Before their actual Awakening, I appear as all kinds of things to them. I suggest all kinds
of fantastic things. All the things they can imagine while they dream, everything unbelievable, is
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

2

what they think I am. I may appear to be extraordinary, a doer of famous things. I may appear
playfully as that. But I Am simply Awake. Not a single thing is happening. Not a single thing has
been accomplished. I Am Only Awake.
I am like the sunlight in the morning. I Intensify the light of morning until you Awaken.
Until the Light Awakens you, even the Light of Consciousness Itself, you continue to dream, try
to survive within the dream, manipulate yourself within the dream, pursue all kinds of goals,
searches—none of which Awaken you.
The ordinary means only console you and distract you within the dream. I Myself, the
One Who would Awaken you, am not a person, not an individual within the dream. I Am your
Very Consciousness. I Am Reality Itself, the Divine Conscious Light, the True Waking State, the
True Divine Heart—Breaking Through the force of dreaming. It is not that you are some poor
person who needs some other poor person to help you out. It may appear to be so within the
dream—but, in Reality, I Am your own True Self-Nature Appearing within the dream to Awaken
you. I Am your Awakening, and your Always Already Conscious State.
Even while dreaming, you may experience suggestions of waking. You may become
momentarily aware of the body, momentarily aware of lying in bed. For a moment, the images of
the dream may stop. Likewise, I Myself, Appearing within the world, Am truly your Real
Conscious State. My Person in the world is like an image in a dream. But, in fact, I am more like
your moments of wakening awareness—the moments that move you into the waking state. I am
not some separateness, some individual. I Am Consciousness Itself, Reality Itself, Truth Itself.
2.
In heart-Communion with Me, the Truth is Lived to you—and you then live the Truth as
your Condition. Gradually, you become less and less involved with the suffering-and-seeking
images of yourself. You become less concerned with the usual process of your life. You are
doing less and less about it. You are trying less and less to get free, to get Realized, to get to
God, Liberation, and pleasant sensation. You are not trying to stop engaging all of that effort. It
just begins to wear down, while you live the conditions Given by Me. You simply notice this. You
cease to be occupied with your search—because the Truth is being Lived to you. The Truth is
being Lived as yourself, by Means of My Divine Avataric Grace.
That Realization Which does not support separation and seeking is the ground of
"radical" self-understanding. In heart-Communion with Me, that Realization replaces the
ordinary operating basis of your life. You simply forget your adventure of suffering—that is all.
The Power of heart-Communion with Me distracts you from mere suffering (or the separate and
separative and always seeking body-mind-self)—until Truth Itself becomes Obvious.
Therefore, Truth is not a matter of doing something to the ego, the separate-self-sense,
the identification with the body, or anything else. Rather, Truth is simply to be lived—because
Truth obviates all that is not Truth.
I Live the Divine Force, and Generate the conditions, of Spiritual life in relationship to My
devotee. Over time, more and more responsibility is given to My devotee—in the course of
deepening devotion to Me and increasing self-discipline, self-understanding, and selftranscendence (or Real ego-transcendence). The process of the heart-relationship with Me is a
Divine Gift, Avatarically Given by Me—a Gift That is progressively more and more profound.
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

3

3.
I have talked about the relationship between Guru and devotee as the essence, the
fundamental condition, of Spiritual practice. But the Guru-devotee relationship is not a form of
concentration on the Guru as a separate (and merely symbolic) entity. That is not relationship.
That is your own fabrication, your own suffering again. Whenever there is relationship, there is
no need for all of these symbolic constructs. The true nature of Spiritual practice in My Divine
Avataric Heart-Company is to live the Condition (and the life-conditions) of heart-Communion
with Me, of relationship to Me in My Function as True Divine Guru.
Within the dream, the potential images may be consoling, and even hopeful—but such
consolation or hope is not the equivalent of being Awake. Consolation and hope depend upon
your being asleep. The forms of seeking exploit your capability to identify with the fundamental
dilemma of dreaming, which is its unconsciousness. The forms of seeking may satisfy you
within the context of your presumptions, but they are not the equivalent of Waking Up.
What is required to Wake Up? What can you do within the dream to Wake Up? Not a
thing. There is only the Waking Itself. All actions within the dream are forms of the dream itself.
Waking is another process—and It occurs by other means, by Divinely Graceful Means.
I am not a symbol, a condition of the dream itself. No mere symbol, no mere condition of
the dream, can Wake you Up. I Am the Divine Conscious Light, the Real Divine Person—
Always Already Awake, Functioning Alive. I Appear in bodily (human) Form, within the dream of
life—not in order to console you, but to Awaken you through the Real crisis in consciousness. I
am a frustration to the unconscious condition of the dream.
I Am the Man of "Radical" Understanding. In My Function as the True Divine Guru, I Am
the Divine Awakener. I Am the Person of Reality Itself.
I Am Always Already Awake. I could not care less about your urges and demands within
the dream. I refuse to satisfy them. I refuse to give you an experience merely to console you. I
have no intention of satisfying anyone's egoic game. All the demands for satisfaction that you
bring are frustrated in My Company. What is satisfied, what is made to grow, is that fundamental
Intuition of Reality that is already the Foundation of your existence. That Intuition is intensified in
heart-Communion with Me. All the rest, the fascinated search, begins to fall away. In heartCommunion with Me, the search begins to reveal itself, until it becomes obvious.
4.
Only the seeker takes the dilemma seriously. The waking state does not take your
dreams seriously. It is not the least concerned with your dreams. And, fortunately, all beings are
already alive with the Intuition of Reality. Therefore, all beings have an affinity with Sunlight, with
the True Waking State—with Me. Unqualified Reality, the Love-Bliss-Happiness of My "Bright"
Divine Self-Condition, is What they are already living—and that is What is consciously
discovered in the heart-relationship to Me. Because you Always Already Inhere in My LoveBliss-Happiness, I Draw you to Myself.
It is the Intuition of Reality Itself that inexorably draws people to Me, that leads them to
maintain themselves in My Divine Avataric Heart-Company. All apparent "reasons" for holding
on to Me fall away, and also all the apparent "reasons" for not holding on to Me. None of these
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The One Who Would Awaken You
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

4

reasons has any ultimate significance. It is your inherent affinity for Truth, your Intuition of the
Divine Self-Condition, of the Living Divine Heart Itself, that is entirely responsible for the practice
in My Divine Avataric Heart-Company.
When you become less concerned with your particular search, your inwardness, your
adventure, then you have simply become more sensitive to your Real Condition. You have felt
the sunlight falling on your sleeping eyes. When your eyes have opened in the morning light,
everything will be obvious to you—and you will know that you have never slept, that you have
never dreamed, that you have never been limited to any thing that has appeared. You have
never been limited to any condition that you have presumed. There was always only Reality
Itself, the True Divine Self-Nature of all-and-All—Which Is Love-Bliss-Happiness Itself,
Consciousness Itself, the Unqualified Presence of Reality Itself, Truth Itself, and Real (Acausal)
God.
I Am That.

An excerpt from the book The Ancient Walk-About Way
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj
Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877.770.0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)

Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

