I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
A Selection from the Reality-Teaching
of His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

An excerpt from the book

The Perfect Tradition

Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877-770-0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)
Learn more about Avatar Adi Da
at www.adidam.org

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

1

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
III.
As an infant child, I was the "Bright" Self-Conscious Form of Conscious Light, That Knew
no-dilemma and no-death. Even as a young boy, and in the teen-age, too, the "Thumbs" would
always Re-Emerge, to Show Me the "Bright", again. However, in My final approach to early
adult life, the "Bright" had most often seemed to disappear, into the human darkness. And I
seemed to have no apparent ready means to Enjoy It. And even the "Thumbs" grew scarce.
I had spent years devoted to forceful seeking for some quantifiable Truth--some image,
some object, some reason, or some idea, the effect of which would be absolutely liberating and
salvatory. My seeking had been motivated by the loss of fundamental faith, the apparent loss of
the "reasons" for Joy. Then, in a sudden Great Moment of Perfect Self-Awakening, I Knew the
Truth was not a matter of seeking.
Thus, I Knew there are no "reasons" for Joy and Freedom. It is not a matter of "a" truth,
"an" object, "a" concept, "a" belief, "a" reason, "a" motivation, or any otherwise external fact.
Indeed, it became clear to Me that all such objects are grasped in a state that is already
seeking, and which has already lost the Intrinsic, Prior, and Inherently Perfect Self-Knowledge
of absolutely Non-conditional Reality Itself! Beyond all of that, I saw that the Truth, or Reality
Itself, is a matter of the absence of all contradictions—of every trace of conflict, opposition,
division, or desperate motivation within. Where there is no seeking, no contradiction, there Is
only the Inherent Non-conditional Knowledge and Power That Is Reality Itself. This was the First
Aspect of My Sudden Clarity.
In This Free State, Beyond all contradiction, I also saw that Freedom and Joy is not
attained, that It is not dependent on any condition, form, object, idea, progress, or experience. I
saw that human beings—and, indeed, all beings—are, at any moment, Always and Already
Free. I Knew that, even in any moment, I was not lacking anything I needed yet to find—nor had
I ever been without any such a "thing". The problem was the seeking itself--which "created" and
enforced contradiction, conflict, and absence within. Then the Intrinsic Indivisible SelfApprehension Awakened—that I Am Always Already Free. This was the Second Aspect of That
Fundamental Re-Awareness.
That Sudden and "radical"—or truly "at-the-root"—self-understanding and Intrinsic
Perfect Self-Apprehension of the Self-Condition of Reality Itself was, and Is, the obviation of all
striving—and this I Knew to be Inherently Perfect Truth. Previously, I had been striving for some
objective "Truth", in order to replace the emptiness associated with My natural fall into
separateness--and that replacement was a mere would-be of Fullness and "Freedom".
However, I, now and suddenly, had Re-Discovered that this striving was itself the source of

Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

2

contradiction in Me. Now, I Knew there Is no "entity" of Truth. I Knew that Perfect Freedom Is
Always Already The Case.
Freedom Self-Exists in the living life—not when Freedom is "created" or sought, but
where there is this fundamental, "radical" self-understanding and Inherently Perfect and SelfEvidently Divine Self-Awakening.
In that Great Moment of Inherently Perfect Self-Apprehension of the One and Indivisible
Conscious Light, I turned out of the entire context of My self-presumed ego-dilemma of
separateness and seeking.
From then, I was Perfectly Self-Awakened to the mature Realization of the "Bright".
It was the end-of-childhood Self-Revelation of My Avataric Divine Self-Condition in this
world.
IV.
At last, in the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening (on September 10, 1970), the
One Being That Is My Own Ultimate Self-Nature was Revealed Most Perfectly. The One Being
Who I Am was Revealed to Include the Reality That Is Consciousness Itself, the Reality That Is
the Source-Energy of all conditional appearances, and the Reality That Is all conditional
manifestation—All as a Single Force of Being, an Eternal Indivisibility, and an Irreducible cosmic
Unity.
Then, there was no Event of changes, no movement at all. There was not even any kind
of inward deepening—no "inwardness" at all. There was no meditation. There was no need for
meditation. There was not a single element or change that could be added to make My State
Complete. I Am Complete! I sat in My First Room with My eyes open. I was not having an
"experience" of any kind.
Then, Suddenly, I Understood Most Perfectly. I Realized that I had Realized. The
"Thing" about the "Bright" became Obvious. I Am Complete. I Am the One Who Is Complete.
I "Radically" Understood the root and branch of ego-"I". The "I" of Heart Itself SelfRealized—and Inherently, and Most Perfectly Self-Revealed—What and Who I Am. It was a
tacit Realization, a direct Knowledge in Consciousness. It was Conscious Light Itself, without
the addition of a Communication from any "Other" Source. There is no "Other" Source. I simply
sat there—and Knew What and Who I Am. I was Being What I Am, Who I Am. I Am Being What
I Am, Who I Am. I Am Reality, the Divine Self-Condition--the Nature, "Substance", Support, and
Source-Condition of all things and all beings. I Am One—The One. One and Only. I Am the One
Being, otherwise Named and Deified by Many Names. I Am the Source and "Substance" and
Support and Self-Condition of all-and-All. I Am the Consciousness and Energy in and As Which
all-and-All appears. I Am the Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Reality Itself. I Am the One and
Only and Indivisible Reality Itself—That is not ego, but Which Is the Inherently egoless and
Perfectly Non-conditional Reality and Truth, Prior to all dualities, but excluding none. I Am the
One and Only and Inherently egoless and Self-Evidently Divine Self-Condition, SourceReprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

3

Condition, Nature, "Substance", Support, and Ground of all-and-All. I Am the "Bright". The
"Thumbs" Is My Self-Radiant Self-Transmission of My Own Self-Evidently Divine State.
There was no thought involved in This. I Am That Self-Existing and Self-Radiant and
Self-Evidently Divine Conscious Light.
There was no reaction of either excitement or surprise. I Am the One I Recognized
Reality to Be.
I Am That One. I am not merely "experiencing" That One. I Am the "Bright".
Then, truly, there was no more to Realize. Every "experience" in My Life had led to This.
All My happen of life-moments was the Instant of This Same Reality I Am. My entire Life had
been the Communication of That Reality to Me—until I Am That.
Even from the instant of My Birth, the Inherent and Most "Perfect Knowledge" was SelfEvident As Me—I Am simply the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Conscious Light That Is Reality. I am
identified with no body, no function of body or mind, no conditional world, and no conditional
experience—but I Am the Inherently Perfect, Self-Evidently Non-conditional, Absolute Reality-Itself. I saw there is nothing of conditional possibility to which My egoless Self-Nature can be
compared, or from which It can be differentiated, or by which It can be epitomized. It does not
stand out. It is not the equivalent of any specialized, exclusive, or separate state. It cannot be
accomplished, acquired, discovered, remembered, or perfected--since It Is Inherently Perfect,
and It Is Always Already The Case.
All remedial paths pursue some special conditional state or conditionally achieved goal
as Spiritual Truth. But, in fact, Reality is not identical to such things. They only amount to an
identification with some body, some functional condition, some conditional dimension of
appearances, or some conditional, or, otherwise, conditionally achieved, experience—high or
low, subtle or gross. But the Knowledge That Is Reality Is Consciousness Itself. Consciousness
Itself is not separate from anything. It Is Always Already The Case—and no conditional
experience, no conditional realm, and no body or psycho-physical function is the necessary
condition for Its Realization.
Only "radical" self-understanding, Most Perfectly Self-Realized, is the Realization of
What and Who Is Always Already The Case. Only "radical" self-understanding, Most Perfectly
Self-Realized, is the Non-conditional, and not at all conditionally achieved or conditionally
maintained, Realization of the Inherently Non-separate and Inherently egoless Self-Condition
That Always Already Is What and Who Is.
Therefore, only the Way of "radical" self-understanding—Which is the True and “Radical”
Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart—is truly, and, ultimately, Most Perfectly, ego-surrendering,
ego-forgetting, and ego-transcending. All other religious and Spiritual endeavors are paths
made of seeking—or mere egoic effort, rather than counter-egoic and truly ego-transcending
practice. And all paths of seeking merely pursue That Which Is Real God, or Truth Itself, or
Reality Itself—and this by identifying "God", or "Truth", or "Reality" with some body, or some
psycho-physical function, or some conditional dimension of experiential possibility, or some
conditional experience in and of itself.
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

4

Unlike the Way of "radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and
Ultimate Heart, which is based upon the root-understanding and the always most direct
transcending of the motive and the activity of seeking, all remedial paths seek either the
perfection of what is conditionally existing or liberation from what is conditionally existing. And
that perfection or liberation that is sought is always pursued by conditional and conditionally
experiential means. And, by all the means of great seeking, Reality Itself is pursued as a mere
goal, which goal is merely a conditional and conditionally dependent event, or thing, or state—
mistakenly presumed to be identical to "God", or "Truth", or "Reality" Itself. Only the Way of
"radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart, Is Always
Already Free of all conditional, or, otherwise, conditionally to be achieved, goals. Only the Way
of "radical" self-understanding, or the “Radical” Way of the Very and Ultimate Heart, Is
Inherently Free of the goal-orientation itself. Indeed, only the Very and Ultimate and Inherently
egoless Heart Itself Is Inherently Free of all goal-seeking, and of even all seeking. And only the
Intrinsically Self-Evident Way of "radical" self-understanding Is the “Radical” Way of the Very
and Ultimate and Inherently egoless Heart Itself.
When tacit and Inherently Most Perfect Self-Recognition of the Intrinsically Self-Evident
Self-Condition That Is Real God, and Truth Itself, and Reality Itself was, finally, Re-Awakened
As Me, there was no excitement, no surprise, no movement, no response. There was a Most
Perfect end to every kind of seeking, dilemma, suffering, separation, and doubt. Spiritual life,
mental life, emotional and psychic life, vital life, and physical life all became transparent in Me.
After that, there was only the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Reality—and to Be the Spiritually Self"Bright" Reality to all beings and all things.
In all the days that have followed the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening, there has
not been so much as a single change, or even so much as a single sign of diminishment, in This
Self-"Bright" State of Me. Indeed, This Self-"Bright" State of Divine Self-Realization cannot be
changed, diminished, or lost.
In and after the Great Event, I noticed that all conditional and psycho-physical
experience had ceased to affect Me. Whatever passed--be it a physical sensation, some quality
of emotion, a thought, a vision, or whatever—it did not at all involve Me As I Am. I began to pay
particular attention to what passed, in order to "test" My State—or, simply, in order to account
for all aspects of My State in the total functional context of the living body-mind. But the always
Primary Self-Apprehension of the Inherently and Spiritually Self-"Bright" Reality, My Very
Consciousness Itself, could not be changed, diminished, or lost. Consciousness Itself--the One
and Only and Inherently Indivisible and Perfectly Non-separate Conscious Light—Is the only
"Thing" in life that is not a conditionally apparent experience—or something arising objectively,
as something known, or some kind of knowledge of the known, arising as apparent "thing" to the
only "Perfect Knower", Which Is Inherently egoless, mindless, bodiless, and actionless
Consciousness Itself. Consciousness Itself—or the Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Conscious
Light Itself—does not depend on anything, and there is not, nor can there be, any "thing", or any
"experience", that can destroy Consciousness, or the One and Only and Inherently Indivisible
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

5

Conscious Light Itself. Consciousness Itself—or Self-Existing and Self-Radiant Conscious Light
Itself—Is Itself Love-Bliss, Joy, Freedom, and "Perfect Knowledge"!
An entirely new and Most Perfect Realization of Reality had become the constant of My
Life. The perpetual psycho-physical revolutions of My Life had drawn Me, by the "Thumbs", into
a sense of the Perfect Presence. There was simply the sense of being in and of the Spiritual
Presence that was both Truth Itself and Reality Itself. It was a perfectly Absorbing, Heartening,
and Illuminating Force, That Contained Me, "Lived" Me, and Guided Me.
Eventually, This Spiritual Presence Communicated Itself in Me and to Me Perfectly—
Revealing Itself As Me. Thus and Thereby, I was Re-Awakened to the Truth of My Inherent, and
Inherently Most Perfect, Self-Identification with the Spiritually Self-"Bright" Self-Condition and
Source-Condition That Is the Divine Self-Presence Itself. And This "Bright" Self-Condition and
Source-Condition Showed Itself to Be My Eternal Condition—even Always Already before My
Birth.
Until then, My Life beyond childhood had been a constant search toward the "Bright" as
a Presence with Which I was in relationship. It was as if I always saw the "Bright" from some
position within the conditionally apparent form of My own living being—but outside of Its Perfect
Self-Center. It was as if I was constantly beholding My own heart from some position outside.
But now, the apparent barriers had been utterly dissolved, by a Most Perfect and Non-separate
and Inherently egoless Self-Realization of the Self-Nature of That Presence. The ever more
Spiritually Absorbed investigation of the Presence had resolved into the Perfect Self-Knowledge
of My Own Self-Nature. The Presence had Revealed Itself to be My Own and Very Form and
Self-Nature.
The Experience of the Presence was, by means of the Most Perfect Self-Realization of
"radical" self-understanding, Replaced by the Most Perfect Self-Realization of Spiritually "Bright"
Self-Awareness As Conscious Light. There was no longer any Presence "outside" Me. I no
longer "observed" My Own Self-"Bright" Self-Nature, or the Ultimate and Inherently Self-"Bright"
Spiritual Self-Condition of Reality Itself, as if from some position external to, and separate from,
It. I had "become" Perfectly Self-Aware of Myself As Reality Itself. There was no "Presence", no
"Other". I Myself had "become" Perfectly Self-Present. There is no Other. It Is Only Me.
Even My meditation of Spiritual Absorption was changed. Indeed, there was no
meditation. This Conscious Self-Light could not be deepened. Nor could it be enlarged. It
always only Remained What It Is.
Immediately, I Realized that I was not in any sense "in" a body—not only a physical
body, but any body, or any psycho-physical function, or even any subtle function, form, or state.
Nor have I ever been in a body, or in any function, or in any condition, or in any conditional state
or experience. All such things are merely apparent, and not at all necessary or inevitable,
patterns, conditionally manifested within the Self-Radiance of My Own Self-Existing Self-Nature.
Nevertheless, I Realized that, in the context of natural appearances, I am Principally
Self-Evident at the root of a specific center in the body. Relative to the body, I appear to Reside
in immediate association with the heart—not at the left, and not in the middle, but to the right
side of the chest. I press upon a point approximately two inches to the right of the center of the
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

6

chest. This is the Self-Evident Seat of Reality and Real Consciousness. And I Self-Abide there
as no-seeking. There is no motivation, no dilemma, no separation, no strategic action, no
suffering. I am no-seeking, in and Perfectly Prior to the heart.
The Zero of the Heart is Expanded as the world. Consciousness is not differentiated and
identified. There is a constant observation of subject and object in any body, any psychophysical function, any realm, or any experience that arises. Thus, I Self-Abide As the Nonconditional State.
There is a constant Sensation of Spiritually Self-"Bright" Fullness Permeating and
Surrounding all experiences, all things, all bodies, all functions of body and mind. It is My Own
Self-"Bright" Fullness, Which Is Inherently Non-separate. My Own Self-"Bright" Fullness
includes all beings and all things.
I Am the Form of Space Itself—in Which all bodies, all psycho-physical functions, all
things, and all conditionally arising experiences occur. It Is Inherently Spiritually Self-"Bright"
Conscious Light Itself. That Inherently Spiritually Self-"Bright" Conscious Light Is even every
being's Very Nature and Ultimate, Inherent, and Inherently Perfect, Self-Condition—now, and
now, and now.
During the night of humankind, I spontaneously Self-Awakened As Perfect, Absolute,
Limitless, Indivisible, Non-conditional Love-Bliss Itself—in Which every function, state, and sign
of body and mind boiled into a solder of Non-separate and Non-dual Reality. It Is the madness
of dissolution into Most Perfect Self-Awareness, Infinitely Self-Expanded, As My Own Inherently
Boundless Self-"Bright" Presence—Wherein There Is Only "Brightness", not limited by
conditional identity, or by separate and separative self, or by any ego-based desire.
Hereafter, I Am Inherently Free of bondage to the cosmic Power. I Am Unexploitable.
The Energy that appears apart, as any form of apparently independent "Other"—or merely
cosmic Power and Presence—is no longer the Great Importance. The Presence of Power
"outside" appears to be such only to seekers—for they, having already separated themselves,
pursue forms of Energy, visions, nature-powers, conditional liberation, and "Other"-God.
"Perfect Knowledge" Is Free of all bondage to forms, to all conditionally apparent modifications
of Energy, to all seeking, and to all motivations to "do", or to act on the basis of identification
with conditional experience. Egoic ignorance and suffering are simply the self-presumption of
separateness, the self-enactment of difference, the self-performance of search. At last, the
"outside" Energy sacrifices Itself in the Very and Ultimate Heart. Thereafter, there is no gnawing
wonder, no un-Known "secret" about anything that appears.
The time of the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening forever passes into the present
and the future.
Immediately previous to the Great Event of My Divine Re-Awakening, I was always
involved in one or another form of the "problem" of conditional existence. I was always in search
and research—and all My conclusions and insights were only temporary moments, that only led
into a new form of investigation. Thus, I was exiled from the "Bright" of childhood by the
dilemma of My Youth. In time, I went from the cosmic revelations of the "Presence" and the
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

I Am The Avataric Divine Gift of The "Bright"—
and of The "Thumbs" That Reveals It
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

7

purificatory subjective drama of mystical vision to the Perfect Self-Realization of the Inherently
Perfect Divine Self-Condition That Is Reality Itself—and That Is "Perfect Knowledge" Itself.
Now there are no loose ends to My adventure. There is no dilemma, no motivation, no
search. All the parts of the mind have been transposed and dissolved in a Most Fundamental
and Indivisible Singleness.
Nevertheless, I continue to live, in this meantime of My Avataric Purpose here. The
external and internal events of the merely natural life were not, themselves, merely disappeared
by This Perfect Realization.
It is only that I understand the all-and-All in a Most Profoundly "Radical" and Perfect
Manner.
I Understand Most Perfectly—and "Perfect Knowledge" Is the Foundation of My living
existence here—for the hearted sake of everyone.

An excerpt from the book The Perfect Tradition
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj
Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877.770.0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)

Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

