1 


Ibn al-'Arabl's Testament on the 
Mantle of Initiation (al-Khirqah) 

Gerald Elmore 


Introduction 

The short work translated here in its entirety is important for at least three reasons: 
Firstly, in its conclusion it gives the precise line of descent, or derivation ( nasab ) - 
actually, four of them - of Ibn al-'Arabl's formal spiritual affiliation with the hierar- 
chic Messenger of God as represented by the Shaykh himself. Second, the main body 
of the text constitutes an attractive literary composition which begins by adumbrat- 
ing the author's view on the tradition of investiture of the Sufi 'mantle of initiation' 
(. ilbas al-khirqah), then proceeds to offer an extended string of moral imperatives - 
pearls of wisdom ( hikarri ) cultivated over a long life of intensive mystical experience. 
At the time of setting the Nasab al-khirqah to paper that full, rich life was drawing to 
its natural close - which brings us to the third distinction of the book: the fact that 
it represents Ibn al-'Arabl's maturest thought on the right conduct of life. 

The Nasab seems to have been composed in Damascus in or sometime before 633/ 
1236 - that is, presumably around the time of Ibn al-'Arabl's autobibliography writ- 
ten for al-Malik al-Muzaffar (viz., the Ijazah ) and a few years after the one he drew up 
for Sadr al-DIn al-QunawI (the Fihrist ), neither of which list the work. As it is not 
mentioned by the author anywhere else either, the only evidence of it that we have 
is the assortment of two-dozen or so manuscripts listed by Yahia, 'Awwad and 
Brockelmann. 1 There the situation is somewhat ambiguous. The good news is that the 
book is definitely by Ibn al-'Arabl and it survives reasonably intact in many of the said 
manuscripts. What is not so encouraging, however, is the quality of the source-mate- 
rial when compared to most of the Shaykh's other major works. The fact that none 
of the extant sources appear to be older than the 10th/16th century is both 


1 . See Osman Yahia, Histoire et classification de t'oeuvre d'lbn ' Arab T (Damascus, 1 964), pp. 407-8, no. 530, 
where most of the references of Brockelmann and 'Awwad are also given. In addition, Claude Addas has 
discovered several more manuscripts at the ZahirTyah archive in Damascus (see her translation, cited 
below) and there are two copies at Princeton University. Surely many others will yet turn up, but it is not 
so likely that any will be greatly superior to those described below. 



2 


substantively unfortunate and worrisome in its implications: How has it come to pass 
that all of the earlier copies of such a manifestly significant document have disap- 
peared? Might this not portend that for one cause or another, accidental or otherwise, 
the later transcripts do not perfectly reflect the original text? When we examine the 
material closely these suspicions are hardly allayed. Most of the known codices which 
I inspected in Turkey were very late and inferior. 2 

The four most serviceable manuscripts of the Nasab that I have seen are MSS. Esad 
Efendi 1507/ft 87-98b, §ehidAUPa§a 1344/ 156b-159b, Zahinyah 5924/ 21b-25, 3 and 
Nafiz Pa§a 384/ 228b-235. Of these, §ehid Ali, copied in 948/1541, is materially the 
earliest, but Esad Efendi purports to be based on a certified master-copy in the author's 
own hand, which was dated 633/1236. For the most part that claim may be taken at 
face value, so Esad - along with §ehid Ali and Zahinyah - will form the basis of the 
text translated here. 4 Nafiz is also useful, however, for being fully vocalized. 

The Nasab al-khirqah was published in Cairo in 1987 ('Alam al-Fikr) by 'Abd al- 
Rahman Hasan Mahmud as an appendix to his edition of Ibn al-'Arabl's K. al-Masa’il 
(under the title of Al-Tanazzulat al-layllyah f l-ahkam al-ilahtyah ), on pp. 79-96 [here- 
after, C], The source of this text was a learned (but uncritical) monograph entitled 
Al-Burhan al-jali f tahqlq intisab al-sufyah li-Ali (published in the Cairene journal, 
Liwd ’ al-Islam, from Feb., 1979 to May, 1981) 5 by a Moroccan sharlf and Shadhilite 
traditionist then resident in Egypt, Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Siddiq al-Ghimarl al- 
Hasanl al-ldrlsl, who quoted Ibn al-'Arabi's Nasab to show that the Sufis recognized 
that their khirqah did not actually extend back continuously to the Prophet's noble 
house. The material appropriated by Mahmud was only part of the Nasab offered in 
Shaykh al-Ghimari's study, however, so the journal series must still be consulted for 
about a third of the work (including the chains of transmission). But as far as it goes, 
the printed Arabic text is fairly sound, so that the manuscript basis - whatever it may 

2. Included in that category would be MSS. Hafid Efendi 482, Halet Ef. 93, and Haci Mahmud [= Yahya ] 
Ef. 2415, 2718 & 5322 (all kept at the Suleymaniye). Carullah 2111 may have been produced as early as 
91 5/1 509, but it is incomplete and corrupt. Nafiz 384 is very neat but probably quite late. Besides the other 
sources mentioned infra, I have also consulted two late manuscripts at the Firestone Library in Princeton 
( Yahuda 4235 & 4098) and several others in Istanbul. 

3. I am indebted to Jane Clark, librarian of the Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arab! Society (Oxford), for providing me 
with a photocopy of this transcript. The other three manuscripts listed here were consulted at the Suleymaniye. 

4. For a fuller account of the manuscript basis of the Nasab, see my review of Claude Addas's translation of 
the work (in this issue, pp.1 33-7) [included as appendix at the end of this article], 

5. Vol. 33, no. 7, to vol. 35, nos. 9-1 0. The bulk of the first two-thirds of the Nasab may be found in the 
issue of June-July, 1 980, pp. 39-42. The silsilahs are on p. 40 of the June, 1 979, and p. 33 of the July issues. 
The journal ceased appearing for a year after President Sadat was assassinated, and, indeed, never resumed 
with its former quality. 



3 


have been - apart from the omissions, was evidently quite as good as those sources 
mentioned above. 

Latest in time but certainly not least in authority, the recent French translation 
of the Nasab by Claude Addas - "Le Livre de la filiation spirituelle" (Ayn al-Hayat, 5 
[1999], pp. 5-44) - has greatly assisted me in the final revision of my own translation 
presented here, and I cannot fail to express my admiration for Addas's scholarship and 
insight even where we, quite naturally, take a different view on this or that issue. Here 
and there we have established/interp reted the Arabic text of the Nasab differently, as 
well, and it is this that justified the publication of my own attempt, even after Addas's 
superb accomplishment. 

I first edited and translated the Nasab al-khirqah in the spring of 1993 during a 
study-mission to the magnificent Siileymaniye Kiitiiphane in Istanbul. At the time I 
did not know that Addas had already reached an advanced stage of work on the same 
project, and having completed my immediate task involving the Anqa’ mughrib 
source-material, I decided to take the opportunity to collate the text of the Nasab on 
the basis of the best manuscripts available in Turkey. Later this collation was expanded 
to include two sources at Princeton and photocopies of other manuscripts. Meanwhile, 
my provisional rendition had undergone several recensions before I belatedly learned 
of my colleague's final preparations to publish the same work just last year. It is hoped 
that this sudden embarras de richesses concerning a book which had barely been 
discussed until this year 6 will not disappoint those students of the Shaykh who are 
so rightly aware of the need for scholars to economize their energies in tapping the 
great Ibn al-'Arabian Reservoir. 

At a later date I plan to publish my edition of the Arabic text of the Nasab, along 
with a more detailed study of the form and content of the document. For the time 
being, however, Ibn al-'Arabi's own voice remains clear enough herein (despite the 
inevitable distortions of translation) that we may trust him to speak for himself. My 
own close work with this little book has affected me more personally than with any 
other writing by the Shaykh. If that counts for companionship (. suhbah ), then we all 
might be 'Akbarians' who read the present work with attention, in sha’ al-Lah\ 


6. That is, beyond the several adversions to the Nasab (and relevant translated passages) in Addas's Quest 
for the Red Sulphur (Cambridge, 1 993), pp. 42-6 and 31 6-7, et al. 



4 


The Descent of the Mantle of Initiation ( Nasab al-Khirqah) 

of the poor Servant of God, 

Muhammad b. 'All Ibn al-'Arabl 
(May God grant him success!) 


In the name of God, the Merciful Merci fieri 

PRAISE BELONGS TO GOD, Who confers upon His Servants, the People of Providence, 
His Beautiful Names, that He might transport them (li-yuhill a-hum) in that most- 
radiant, noble Place of abiding ( al-mahall ). 7 Thus, God caused to ascend ( f arraja ) the 
one who ascended by [His Names ], 8 who was among those whom He chose for His 
worship and bound to Himself up to [the Station of] "Two bows' length or closer" 
(qab qawsayn aw adna ). 9 On account of that Divine Closeness ( al-qurb al-ilahi) God's 
Servants live the most carefree and agreeable way of life. Moreover, He declares 
to them: "Know that it is not possible for one who is from Us to take aught from 
anyone but Us!" 

Among [God's chosen Servants, the Prophets] is the one who is at rest [at the sum- 
mit] of his Ascent ( mVraju-hu ), though he was not adopted as a son ; 10 and among them 
is the one who perseveres in his Night-journey ( isrd’u-hu ) and who agonizes [in his 
continuing struggle], though he cares not what troubles he may meet along the way 
if he attains the intended Object [in the end ]. 11 And among them is he whom God 
takes as a Companion and a Confidant, a beloved Friend and an Intimate 12 - the whole 


7. Elect man is invested with the Divine names (attributes) as a robe of honor ( khil'ah , cognate with 
the first verb used here). The mahall, or 'location', is man's heart, which - according to the celebrated 
tradition guoted below (at n. 36) - is the only thing that may 'contain' God. The 'translocation' of the mystic, 
then, is something of a transubstantiation, or apotheosis. 

8. An allusion to the Prophet Muhammad, who ascended to the highest heavens in his Mi' raj. 

9. Qur. 53: 9, referring to the Angel Gabriel's appearance to Muhammad. 

1 0. Wa-in lam yutabanna. The reference, I think, is to Jesus, who - though he is "at rest" with God after 
being raised up to Him (see Qur. 3: 55) - is not himself Divine as the false Christians suppose. 

1 1 . That is, Muhammad, who journeyed by night from Mecca to Jerusalem (see Qur. 1 7: 1 ). While he 
may be said to remain in a condition of 'becoming ever closer' to God, he is not thereby inferior to one 
(such as Jesus) who has already 'arrived.' 

1 2. Safi wa-naji wa-habib wa-khidn. The terms (which are virtually synonymous, all signifying a 'friend') 
could be construed to refer to the prophets, Adam, Moses, Abraham and David (among others). 



5 


[of mankind] by predestination being Lords of the 'People of the Trusteeship' (sadat 
ahl al-amdnah), who are trustworthy . 1 * * * * * * * * * * * 13 

There [in Destiny] he who stands with the Divine Spirit and he who stands with 
the one sprung "from spilled semen " 14 shall be distinguished, there being naught but 
two groups [of creatures in the Hands of the Creator] ( qabdatan ) - one of the Left, 
which is lesser, and another of the Right, made fortunate . 15 But Mercy encompasses 
every single thing , 16 by virtue of which God enables the distant to become the close, 
if He so will, that he might be distinguished by Closeness [to God - that is, saint- 
liness ] 17 at the time of the Setting- forth [for Judgment] on account of His Foreknow- 
ledge that he was one who had attained unto [that Closeness], having reached 
his Destiny [in pre-eternity]. For the Real had spoken to him in his Innermost being 
(, sirru-hu ) in the silent 'Voice of Reality' ( lisdn al-hal ): "That is only by Our Will!" And 
He averred in the breasts of His Servants that the Divine Presence comprehends both 
the very highest and the lowest attribution. 

I praise God with the Praise of one who speaks by the [Divine] 'He', not by the 
[human] 'I ' 18 - and when [that Divine Praise] is delivered to its keeper and [revealed] 
within its vessel , 19 it brings great benefit! And I bless His chosen Messenger who does 
not cease chanting the Qur’an (May God bless and keep him!) as long as letter joins 
to letter and meaning to meaning, and the meanings take the utterance of the articu- 
lator ( kalimat al-lafiz) as a dwelling . . . 20 

NOW THEN, after Praise and Blessings and [mention of] the abundant gifts and delights which 
God granted us when we sought refuge in Him, I say: " Praise belongs to God, Who guides us 
to this - and we would not be well-guided were not God to guide us. Verily, the Messengers 


1 3. See Qur. 33: 72, where man accepts the "trusteeship" over which all other creatures demurred. 

14. An allusion to Qur. 75: 37, referring to the man ( al-insan ) of physical nature. 

15. That is, the damned and the blessed. 

16. Cf. Qur. 7:156. 

1 7. Al-qurb = walayah (sainthood, "closeness," 'nearness, or proximity' to God). 

18. See Addas's perceptive comment in "La Filiation spirituelle", n. 70. 

19. Ai-hafiz wa-l-ina’. The Divine praise of al-BistamT ("Glory be to Mel") is tantamount to the "I am 

the Real!" of al-Hallaj, and both indicate the sense of the genuine Divinity of Christ as the Word of God 

delivered to the Virgin Mary (in Qur. 4: 1 71). 

20. This line has puzzled the copyists, who all offer different readings of it. The meaning is evidently as 

Addas has suggested: The Prophet's recitation of the Scripture lives on, as it were, in the continuous chant- 

ing of it on the lips of his followers, the Sufis. Each clause of the opening poem, which is simply a stylized 

basmalah, rhymes in -no. Note also that the section contains no mention of the proper theme of the present 

work (although an obligue reference was noted in the first sentence). 



6 


of our Lord have brought the Truth !" 21 And one of the verses brought from The Exalted, the 
Wise' [Matrix of the Scripture ] 22 by the Noble Messenger in the Scripture sent-down, which 
is the Glorious Qur’an, [is the following]: 

O Children of Adam, We have sent down upon you a Vestment ( libas ) to cover your 
shameful parts, and beautiful Raiment (risk); and the Robe of God-fearing ( libas al-taqwa) 

- that is best. [Surat al-A'raf: 26] 

The 'indispensable' [aspect] of the Outer Vestment ( al-libas al-zahir ) is that which 
covers the shameful parts - that being the "Robe of God-fearing" [i. e., decency] - for 
the sake of protection . 23 The "beautiful Raiment" is what exceeds that, in which there 
is adornment ( al-zinah ) - "the Adornment of God which He brings forth for His Serv- 
ants " 24 from the treasuries of His Transcendencies, and which He has made a Saving 
grace ( khalisah ) 251 for the Believers during the life of this World and on the Day of 
Resurrection , 26 when they shall not be called to account for it. But if they wear it and 
adorn themselves therein without this Intent and without this Presence , 27 wearing it 
in vanity and conceit, then that is "the adornment of the life of this World ( al-hayah 
al-dunya ).” 28 For the cloth ( al-thawb ) is one, but the judgment upon it is various, in 
accordance with the variety of intentions . 29 

Again, the [real] Robe of God-fearing - which is the "Best" Vestment [in the above- 
quoted verse] - was sent down into the hearts of the Servants of God, it being in the 
exact form of the Outer Vestment . 30 Like the latter, it is an 'indispensable' vestment 
{libas damn) which covers the shameful things of the Inner aspect (saw’ at al-batin ) - 


21 . Qur. 7: 43. 

22. God is described by the epithets, al-'Ali al-HakTm, in Qur. 42: 51 (and, separately, in many places). 
Just six verses later, in 43: 4, however, the same terms are applied to the celestial prototype, or metaphysical 
matrix, of the Qur’an (the umm al-kitab ), and our present passage is not without a like ambiguity. 

23. In current usage, libas al-taqwa has become an expression for modesty, or common 'decency'. 

24. Qur. 7: 32. 

25. An allusion to the second half of the verse just quoted; but the key-word, khalisah, is explained more 
clearly in Qur. 38: 46: "Verily, We have saved them with a Saving qualification ( khalisah ) - the recollection 
of the Final Abode." 

26. Mahmud (the editor of C) reads "the day of Establishment" ( iqamah instead of qiyamah) in the 
eternal Abode ( dar al-muqamah ), with reference to Qur. 35: 35. 

27. That is, without the intent to recollect the Hereafter and, hence, be present therein even now (see n. 25). 

28. See Qur. 18: 28 & 46; and cf. 57: 20. 

29. The "beautiful Raiment" and the "Adornment of God" are the spiritual-intellectual endowments and 
virtues which, in the SOffs, bring the recollection of eternity, and are the 'saving grace' which purifies them 
for eternal bliss in the Hereafter; but in the worldly these same endowments are mere vainglory, leading to 
damnation. 

30. Note that the Shaykh already identified the outer most garment as the prerequisite libas al-taqwa 



7 


that being fear of God regarding everything forbidden ( taqwa l-maharim ), in principle. 
In it, also, is that which is like the "beautiful Raiment" in the Outer aspect - that being 
the Vestment of the Noble Moral qualities ( makarim al-akhlaq), such as the 
supererogatory acts of devotion, like forgiveness and peace-making in cases when the 
Lawgiver has permitted you to assert your right . 31 But the relinquishing of one's right 
is one of the things whereby Man may adorn himself within, for that is the Adorn- 
ment of God in the Inner aspect - that being every Inner Vestment to which the Law 
shows you the way . 32 

The Inner Vestment has been realized in the form of the Outer as to the Law; and, 
even as the Outer is various in its purposes and intents, so the Inner Vestment differs 
in intents and purposes. When this was determined in the minds of the People of 
God , 33 they desired to bring together the two modes of Vestiture ( libsatan ) and to 
adorn themselves with the two types of Adornment in order to combine the two 
Most-excellent Qualifications ( al-husaynayayn ) 34 and, thus, come back from the two 
extremes . 35 For the cause of their donning this Distinguished Mantle ( al-khirqah al- 
ma'lumah ) is that it might be an indication ( tanbih ) of that to which they aspire for 
the Vestment of their Inner parts; and they deem that [to be a sign of] good Compan- 
ionship and Moral instruction ( suhbah wa-adab). 

The origin of this Vestment, in my view - according to what was revealed to my 
Innermost being - is God's own 'putting on' the Heart of His Servant. For verily, He 
has declared: "My Earth and My Heaven do not contain Me, but the Heart of My 
faithful Servant contains Me ." 36 For the clothing 'contains' its Wearer. When that [i.e., 
the Divine presence] was decreed in my Innermost being, and my standing among 
the Knowers of God became magnified, I composed these verses on the subject: 


(= basic decency), but this, the glorified inner one, is the "best" of them - the bona fide robe of God- 
fearing/piety, which, however, takes the same generic form as the outer. 

31 . Such as, for instance, turning the other cheek if someone should strike you without cause (see 
Matt. 5: 39). Most of the commandments of Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount would be classed as acts of 
supererogation ( nawafil ). It is precisely their voluntary (creative) nature that lends them salvific efficacy. 

32. That is, as an ideal (not a mandatory) objective. 

33. "When this was determined": that is, in the mid-4th/10th century, when the tradition of the 
symbolic mantle of initiation was first instituted by Sufis like al-ShibIT and Ibn KhafTf, as we will see below 
(at nn. 40-1 ). 

34. See E. W. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon (rep., Cambridge, 1984), s.v. husayna. 

35. Fa-yathabu mina i-tarafayni. The verb is cognate with the word, thawb (clothing; garment). The "two 
extremes," or 'extremities', have various significations in proverbs (see ibid., s.v. fora/), but the usage here 
is probably rhetorical. 

36. On this very popular (but non-canonical) hadlth qudsl, see Su'ad al-Haklm, Al-Mu'jam al-sufi (Beirut, 
1981), pp. 1265-6. 



8 


[The Mantle of the Heart] 37 

Of knowers, am I not most avaricious 

with my Way and my Secret 38 - most ungenerous? 

No! This is not avarice, but, rather, 

it is the most generous form of Favor: 

I will accommodate [my Lord] whenever 

my knowing Heart realizes His [Presence] ! 

I am the Sun, disclosed by my own Essence, 

if I will; and the waning Moons reveal me 
When I will that - All of this in accordance 

with my Station. And the Stars will reveal me 
When the Night becomes most dark from my Absence 
and the World benighted loses sight of me. 

But when my Mantle 'covers' [God's] Essence , 39 
all will be bewildered by its brilliance! 

Now, the combination of the two types of Vestiture appeared from the time of [the 
tenth-century Eastern Sufi masters] al-Shibll 40 and Ibn Khaflf , 41 etcetera , and our own 
course has followed their way ( madhhab ) in that . 42 We have donned [the Mantle] at 
the hands of a number of noble Sufi masters 43 after having been their companion and 
followed their Moral example, so that my wearing of the Vestment might be authen- 
ticated, both externally and internally. But our way regarding the investiture of 


37. The poem is included in the DJwan Ibn al-'ArabT (Bulaq, 1855), p. 58 (no. 147). The metre is al- 
mutaqarib. 

38. DIn-I wa-sirr-T. For the many possible connotations of these two words, see Lane, Lexicon, s.v. 

39. Idha labbisat khirqat-i dhata-hu. God 'wears' the mantle of the Sufi's heart, which is His proper 
'garment' - the only created thing that might be said to contain Him. 

40. Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Dulaf b. Jahdar al-Shibll of Baghdad (d. 945). See also at n. 1 1 6, below. 

41 . Abu 'Abd al-Lah Muhammad Ibn Khafif b. Isfakshadh of Shiraz (d. 982). See also at n. 1 35. 

42. Al-Shibll was the initiator of the first formal investiture, or line of descent, listed below which ulti- 
mately was received by Ibn al-'ArabT, and Ibn Khafif instituted the second. In each case these masters had 
themselves been the final link in a chain leading back to God (through Gabriel and the Prophet), but the 
associations before the mid-tenth century had not been formalized by an actual hierurgic rite of investiture 
(as is clear from the technical language used in the silsilahs themselves). 

43. The word translated "a number" here actually implies a rather numerous company (jammah ), raising 
at least the possibility that Ibn al-'Arabi may have received other than the four investitures certified in the 
Nasab. 



9 


Aspirant-disciples ( libas murid al-tarbiyah ) is different from what is current today 44 - 
and that is that the Master should carefully examine the Aspirant who aspires to be 
invested with the Mantle, since any spiritual State ( hal ) in which the Disciple finds 
himself may be for him a deficiency . 45 So the Master 'invests' himself in that State in 
order to ascertain the reality of it as it inundates him, the power of the State flowing 
into the garment ( al-thawb ) that the Master happens to be wearing. Then he takes off 
the garment while in that State, and clothes him - the Aspirant - in it, so that the 
flow of spiritual 'Wine' ( saraydn al-khamr ) might permeate him, pervading his mem- 
bers, and inundate him, perfecting the State for him. But nowadays this [sort of 
initiatic procedure] is quite rare , 46 and when the spiritual energies ( himam ) of people 
fall short of the kinds of things of which we have just been speaking, they degener- 
ate to the level of the common masses. Even then, however, they stipulate therein 
certain conditions (shuriit) - this Distinguished Mantle being conditional on the form 
of what the Real has proclaimed with regard to covering shameful things (sitr al- 
saw’at ): 

For the shamefulness of falsehood should be covered with the vestment of 
Truthfulness ( libas al-sidq ); and the shamefulness of treachery with the garment of 
Trustworthiness ( thawb al-amanah ); 

And perfidy is covered with the mantle of Fidelity ( khirqat al-wafa’); and hypoc- 
risy with the mantle of Sincerity ( al-ikhlas ); 

And foolish morals are covered by the mantle of Noble morals ( makarim al-akhlaq ); 
and reprehensible acts by the mantle of Praiseworthy acts ( al-mahamid ); and every base 
nature with the mantle of every Sublime nature ( khuluq sanT); 

And the mere renouncing of [belief in] the secondary causes ( al-asbab ) must be 
covered with the Absolute Affirmation of the ONE ( tawfud al-tajrid ); 

And trust in finite entities ( al-tawakkul 'ala l-akwan ) is covered with complete Trust 
in God alone; 


44. This line is only found in some of the sources; and although it is probably an interpolation, it could 
well have been added by the author himself. 

45. For instance, a highly intelligent disciple might lack compassion or common sense, and even one 
who is very virtuous may still suffer from spiritual pride (d la the young man in Matt. 1 9: 1 6-23). 

46. Recall that this was written at the end of Ibn al-'ArabT's career. A similar glimpse into the Shaykh's 
empirical teaching method may be found in an early work, the ’Anqa’ mughrib (Cairo, 1954), pp. 11-12 
(translated in G. Elmore, Islamic Sainthood in the Fullness of Time [Leiden, 1999], pp. 264-5); and an even 
more germane passage is in the Futuhat al-makklyah (Cairo, 1911), vol. I, pp. 186-7, translated below 
(n. 147). 



10 


And thanklessness ( kufi ■ al-ni'mah, the 'unbelief of the benefit') with Thankfulness 
towards the Benefactor ( shukr al-Mun'im ). 47 

Then adorn yourself in the Adornment of God ( zinat al-Lah ) with vestiture of the 
Praiseworthy Morals ( malabis al-akhlaq al-mahmudah ), such as: 

Silence ( al-samt ) regarding what does not concern you, 

Averting the eyes from what is improper to gaze upon, 

Inspecting the bodily members with timorousness, 

Relinquishing mistrust of people, 

Perusing (; tasaffuh ) the daily pages of your actions and what the pens of the Noble 
Scribes record against you , 48 

Contentment (al-qana'ah) with little sustenance - not looking for an increase in 
anything but good deeds , 49 

Examination of the soul's dispositions ( akhlaq al-nafs), 

Repeatedly seeking God's Forgiveness ( ta 'ahud al-istighfar ) and turning to recite the 
Qur’an, 

Adherence to the edifying manners of Prophetary Culture ( al-adab al-nabawiyah ) 
and studying the morals of the Righteous ( akhlaq al-salihm ), 

Striving emulously ( al-munafasah ) in matters of Religion and Kinship relations, 

Diligence in friendliness towards neighbors, 

And the expending of one's very self/honor ( badhl al-'ird). The Messenger of God 
(May God bless and keep him!) spoke of that, saying: "Is anyone of you able to be as 
Abu Damdam? When he woke up in the morning he used to declare, 'O God! Verily, 
I give my self/honor (' ird-i ) as alms to Your Servants .'" 50 

[Similarly,] you must be generous of soul ( sakha ’ al-nafs, - 'ready to relinquish what 
one has') - that is, expend the soul/self to satisfy the needs of mankind ; 51 

Do favors ( istind r al-ma'ruf) for both friend and foe, treating all alike with humil- 
ity, gentleness and long-suffering; 


47. These first 'ten commandments' correspond to the "indispensable" aspect of the robe of God-fear- 
ing. What follows represents the pearls of cultivated virtue, which adorn those more spiritual whose "treasures 
are in Heaven." 

48. Cf. Qur. 82: 10-13. 

49. The second clause is added only in E (and those sources based on it) and C. 

50. Not included in any of the major collections of hadith, but compare the saying of Abu Darda’: "Lend 
from your self/honor for the day of your need." Though it may connote 'honor' ( hasab , sharaf), 'ird is a 
synonym of nafs (self); hence, Abu Darda”s maxim is similar to the lines following. 

51. From this point I have translated the continuous series of recommended virtues as imperatives 
(although the author does not actually begin using the imperative mode until later). 



11 


Overlook the misstep of Brethren; 

Do not go into the disputes that broke out among the Companions [of the Prophet] 
and the great ones of the past ; 52 

Abandon the company of the heedless, except to call them to the Recollection of 
God or to mention His Name in their presence; 

Refrain from becoming engrossed in the subject of the non-essential accidents ( al - 
a' rad) or in the Signs of God {ayat al-Ldh ); 53 

Abstain from speaking evil of rulers 54 and of sinners in the Community of 
Muhammad (May God bless and keep him!); 

Renounce anger - except over violation of the Sacred things of God (; maharim al- 
Lah ) - and relinquish malice and spite in your heart; 

Pardon the one who has harmed you - that is, do not even defend yourself [from 
harm ]; 55 

"Annul the inadvertent stumblings" of men of Virtue ( ahl al-muru’ah - 'gentle- 
men'), "those of Goodly-qualities" ( dhawu l-hay’dt ); 56 

Maintain the protection of women ( ahl al-sitr - 'ladies'); 

Revere Religious scholars ( al-'ulama ’) and all people of Religion ( ahl al-dm ); 

Honor the aged ; 57 and honor the 'Honored one of the nation' ( karimat al-qawm ) - 
whoever that may be, whether Muslim or infidel - all of that in accordance with the 
Divine-legal statute as to how you should honor that personage ; 58 

Show 'courtesy' ( husn al-adab ) toward God and toward everyone else - living or 
dead, present or absent; 

Refute the slander against a Muslim's reputation; 

Beware of much talking, affectation and bragging - for, tmly, much talk leads to a fall; 

But have due respect for the great, kindness for the weak, and mercy for him of 
little stature - seeking out those who are needy to share your possessions with them 
by means of charitable donation and gift; 

52. This is found only in E and C and, indeed, a similar dictum is given below (at n. 74). 

53. The accidents are unintelligible in their phenomenal nature and the Signs of God are inscrutable as 
noumena. 

54. "Of rulers": only in E and C. 

55. Only he who does not resist evil can sincerely pardon it, because he has not personally interacted 
with it. 

56. An allusion to the hadith, "Annul the inadvertent stumblings of those of goodly qualities" (see Musnad 
Ahmad b. Hanbal [Cairo, 1 894-6], vol. VI, p. 1 81 ; and Sunan AbJ Da’ud [Cairo, 1 950], vol. IV, p. 1 89, no. 4). 

57. Cf. ibid., p. 361, no. 23: "Part of the honoring (/y/d/) of God is the honoring (//cram) of the aged." 

58. The reference, I think, is to the de facto ruler of the land (who, in Crusader times, might well be a 
Christian or an Isma'TIT). 



12 


Be easy-going in your speech and guidance , 59 and entertain the guest; 

Disseminate peace and long life [in your social greetings] to people, pursuant to 
the Divine-legal statute, and be not one who curses and defames, finds fault and loudly 
scolds; 

Requite no one with evil though you be in your right, except by way of doing good 
(. ihsan ™ ); 60 

Give "sincere counsel ( al-nasThah ) for the sake of God, His Messenger and the 
leaders of the Muslims and their common people "; 61 

Do not look for misfortunes for anyone, and curse no one - specifically, one of 
God's Servants [i.e., any human being] - whether living or dead. For you cannot know 
what will be the end of the infidel who is still living, nor [do you know] what was 
the end of the departed [if he was not an unbeliever ]. 62 

Do not condemn any of those addicted to carnal appetites ( al-shahawat ) for their 
lusts; 

Do not urge leadership ( al-riyasah ) upon anyone; 

Do not hold down your children to serve your own interests; 

Beware lest you let people 'urinate' in your ear by passing on to you what you will 
be sorry to hear about yourself or another ; 63 

And, certainly, you should love the Believers, all of them - those who do you harm 
and those who are good to you - because of their love of God and His Messenger. Do 
not despise them on account of their contempt for you or anyone else other than God 
and His Messenger. This I was advised by the Messenger of God (May God bless and 
keep him!) in a Dream ( al-manam ) concerning someone [namely, Abu 'Abd al-Lah al- 
TartusI] who had slandered my Master [Abu Madyan] so that I became angry with 
him . 64 Then I saw the Messenger of God (May God bless and keep him!) in the Dream, 
and he asked me: 

59. Or perhaps this word should go with the following clause: 'Guide and entertain the travelling guest.' 

60. Mahmud cites Qur. 41 : 34 in this connection. 

61. This is part of a well-known hadith (recorded by both al-BukharT and Muslim) which identifies 
'sincere counsel' as the very essence of religion (see A. J. Wensinck, et at., Concordance et indices de la tradi- 
tion musuimane [Leiden, 1936-69], s.v. nasihah, for references to this and related traditions). Addas points 
out that Ibn al-'ArabT has discussed this hadith at length in the Futuhat (IV, 468-70). 

62. The unbeliever who is still alive may repent before his death, and even a professed Muslim who has 
died may not have his belief accepted by God. (One can be sure only of the fate of unbelievers who have 
died). This passage can be read otherwise, however, by taking the mention of the infidel's end ( ma yakhtimu 
la-hu ) as a reference to Qur. 2:7, et at., where it is said of the unbelievers that "God has sealed ( khatama ) 
their hearts," etc. 

63. Some sources read: "What will delight you to hear." 

64. We are told the identities of those concerned in Ibn al-'ArabT's Al-Durrah al-fakhirah (MS. Esad Ef. 7 777, 



13 


"Why are you angry with So-and-so?" "Because of his anger/' I answered, "and his 
slandering my Master." 

Then he said (Peace be upon him!): "Do you not know that he loves God and he 
loves me?" I answered, "Yes, of course." 

"Then why do you not love him for his love of me," he asked, "when you are 
angry with him because of his anger for your Master?" "O Messenger of God," I replied, 
"from this very moment I will do so! There is no better Teacher ( mu'allim ) than you, 
who have called my attention to something of which I had been forgetful." 

Take no joy in a reputation flattering to yourself spreading among the general 
public, even if you deserve it. For you never know - will it remain with you or be 
stripped from you ? 65 

Do not set yourself apart from the Believers by a praiseworthy, extraordinary 
Virtue (khulq gharib mahmud) distinguished from you, except you be counted among 
those who merely seek to emulate that Virtue . 66 

Do not put on a display of humility ( al-khushu' ) in your outward behavior ( zahiru - 
ka) by casting yourself supine on the ground, unless you are really so disposed in your 
Inner being ( batinu-ka ). 

Desire not vain increase ( al-takaththur ) from the World. 

Care nothing for the ignorance of him who does not know your worth; rather, it 
is not seemly that there be any sense of your worth even in your own eyes. 

Have no desire that people should listen to your speech. 

Be not anxious 67 to give answer to anything displeasing said about you. 

Be patient 'with' the Real and ‘along with' the Real : 68 "And be patient 69 along with 
those who call upon their Lord, morning and evening, seeking His Face. Do not 
look beyond them, desiring the adornment of the life of this World (zinat al-hayah 


f. 105, translated by Ralph W. J. Austin in Sufis of Andalusia [London, 1971], p. 155), and in the Futuhat 
(IV, 498, II. 27-33 seq.) we learn that the episode took place in Tlemcen in 1 194. 

65. As a coat of arms is stripped from a fallen enemy. 

66. That is, your 'genius' is the "virtue" (khulq: 'natural disposition; moral characteristic'), not yourself. 

67. La tajza'u. The verb is the contrary of isbir ("be patient") in the next line. 

68. Wa-sbir li-l-Haqqi wa-ma'a l-Haqqi. The first verbal phrase has 'with' (//-) in the sense of against: 'with- 
stand, endure'; and the second is its contrary: 'along with' (ma'a). Thus, the Divine reality is to be viewed 
as both 'Agent' and 'Patient' of the trials of life reguiring endurance - both "those who call" for help and 
their "Lord" to Whom they appeal in the verse following. 

69. Wa-sbir nafsa-ka. The object here is actually redundant, being implicit in all intransitive usages of this 
verb. Moreover, God is the implicit cause of the afflictions reguiring the soul's patience, as we may see in 
'Amr b. 'Uthman's definition of sabara (guoted by Lane): "to maintain patience with/against God and to 
receive His trials with an unstraitened mind" (Lexicon, s.v.). 



14 


al-dunya), and obey not him whose heart We have made heedless of Our Remem- 
brance, who follows his pleasure and whose affair is lost . 70 Say: 'The Real/Truth is from 
your Lord!' So, whoever will, may he believe; and whosoever will, let him disbelieve ." 71 

Be equitable in the face of [the demands of] your lower-soul, but do not demand 
equity from anyone else in regard to your own right. 

Greet Muslims in the first place; and return the greeting of Peace upon whomever 
greets you - loud enough that he can hear. 

Be careful not to speak evil of the wealthy when they are niggardly or of worldly 
people when they vie with each other in the World, and do not covet what they have. 

Invoke God in favor of the rulers and those in authority, not against them, even 
when they are oppressive. 

Strive against your lower-soul and your passion, for, truly, it is your greatest 
enemy . 72 

Do not sit much in the market-streets, nor even stroll therein. 

Forbear presenting your [complaint of] damage to the Religious authorities 
(i a’immat al-dm), and do not even bear testimony against the people of the Qiblah 
(viz., Muslims) in anything that may lead the hearer thereof to depart from the 
Community . 73 

Hold back from going into what was disputed among the Companions [of the 
Prophet] - indeed, regarding [anything having to do with the condition of] the dead, 
"for they have reached what they sent ahead ". 74 

Abandon him who is a hypocrite ( al-murd ’) with regard to [faith in] the Qur’an 
and Predestination ( al-qadar ). 7S 

70. Qur. 1 8: 28. The ostensible purpose for quoting this verse in this context is the mention of zJnah (adorn- 
ment; clothing). The adornment of this world are pleasures (ahwa’), while the 'Adornment of God' is the 
saving grace of His Remembrance ( dhikr ), made manifest within in the moral teachings which are the 
subject of this portion of the Nasab. 

71 . Qur. 18: 29. "The Real/Truth is from your Lord": Al-haqq min Rabbi-kum. That is, while we are to be 
patient "along with" those who believe and "call upon their Lord" through the trials of life, we are also to 
remind ourselves that the reality of our suffering has its true source in God, and we are, thus, to be patient 
with/against Him as the Lord even as we are along with Him in the company of His servants. 

72. The 'greater jihad' is the struggle of one's true, higher self and intellect ( r aqi) against the lower-self 
(nafs) and passion (hawa). 

73. That is, to turn away from the qiblah (the direction of Mecca, which all Muslims face in prayer). 

74. Fa-anna-hum afdaw ila ma qaddamu. This is a quote from a hadith which begins: "Do not revile the dead. . ." 
(see al-BukharT, Al-jami' al-sahih , 23: 97 and 81 : 42; and Musnad, VI, 1 80, et al.). The point is that all we can really 
know about the state of the Afterlife (ma ba'd al-mawt ) is that it is determined by our actions in this life. And it was 
precisely such matters as eschatology and the Hereafter on which the Companions did not always agree. 

75. That is, faith in the eternity (uncreatedness) of the Qur’an as the Speech of God and in predestination as a 
sixth tenet of Islam (after belief in God, His angels, His books, His prophets, and the Resurrection of the body). 



15 


Avoid the company of sectarians and innovators ( aid al-ahwa’ wa-l-bida') perni- 
cious to Religion and secular authority ( al-din wa-l-mulk ). 76 

You must expel greed, envy and vanity from your heart when you give free rein 
to these qualities in other than their legitimate places ( al-mawdtin al-mashru'ah ). 77 

You must enter into the company of people ( al-jama'ah ), for 'the wolf eats none 
but the stray [sheep]'. 

Beware of haste in your affairs, except in five things: in Prayer, to begin at the right 
time; in undertaking the Pilgrimage as soon as you are able; in giving food to guests 
before beginning conversation; in preparation of the dead for burial; and the marrying- 
off of the virgin as soon as she reaches maturity. 

Exert every effort in the sincere counsel ( nash ) of God's Servants - whether Mus- 
lim, infidel or polytheist - with knowledge and practical advice . 78 

Cut off the causes/occasions of carelessness [in matters of formal Religion], and up- 
hold the performance of [the five daily] Prayers and the perfection of their ritual form. 

Carry out a reckoning ( al-hisbah ) upon the lower-soul [before you are called to the 
Reckoning ]. 79 

Depart from ignorance in the pursuit of Knowledge: And [an instance of that is] 
that you have the best intentions towards anyone pursuing Knowledge; and regret 
any neglect in putting those intentions to good use . 80 

Shun passions and the Abode of Illusion ( dar al-ghuriir ) [= this World ]. 81 

Believe that the lower-soul ( al-nafs ) is loathsome, for the lower-soul - in the 
belief of the People of God - is every objectionable thought/inclination ( khatir 
madhmum ). 

Oppose acts of injustice; 

Improve your eating habits ; 82 


76. The last word is read as muluk (kings), milk (property), and milal (minority religious communities) by 
the various sources, and is omitted by others. 

77. Greed for knowledge, envy of the virtuous and pride in accomplishment may not always be wrong. 

78. 'Ilm wa-siyasah. From this point on in the series, the 'praiseworthy morals' ( akhlaq mahmudah ) are 
no longer phrased as imperatives in the Arabic, though I have continued to render them as such for stylistic 
reasons. 

79. As Mahmud suggests, this could be reminiscent of the hadith, "Call your selves to reckoning before 
you are called to the Reckoning" ( SahTh al-Tirmidhl [Cairo, 1931], 35: 25). 

80. Like Jesus, Ibn al-'Arabl often takes a general moral platitude and expands upon it in provocative new 
ways. 

81 . An allusion to Qur. 57: 20, describing the life of this world. 

82. Ti'mah: 'one's manner of eating'. To be tayyib al-ti'mah is to be careful to eat only what is lawful 
(see Lexicon, s.v. ti'mah). In a tradition (quoted by Mahmud), the Prophet told a companion that if he 



16 


Strive to reconcile discord 83 - for God will bring together His Servants on the Day 
of Resurrection; 

Drop suspicion [of people], but always be cautious; 

And have fear and anxiety ( al-khashiyah wa-l-hamm ) only with respect to [the Judg- 
ment of] God. 

And have love and hate ( al-hubb wa-l-bughd) for the sake of Him, loving affection 
(i al-mawaddah ) for the Family of God's Messenger - May God bless and keep him! - 
and friendship ( al-muwalah ) for the Righteous. 

Weep much [for the love of God]; 

Implore God and supplicate Him, night and day; 

Flee from the path of leisurely comforts; 

Humble yourself in every circumstance ( hal ) before God - Be He exalted!; 

Watch out for inordinate sadness and spoiling life by mulling over the debt you 
owe the Benefactor ( shukr al-Mun'im ) for all that He has bestowed upon you. 

Aspire to God in every circumstance you are in; 

Help each other to Piety and Fear of God ( al-birr wa-l-taqwd ); 

[Answer the call of the Summoner ( ijabat al-da'T )]; 84 

Support the oppressed ( nusrat al-mazlum ) and answer the one who calls out for 
help ; 85 

Aid the one who is grieving and dispel the sorrow of the sorrowful; 

Fast by day and rise to pray at night - and if it be to spend the whole night in prayer 
(i al-tahajjud ), that is better. 

Commemorate the dead and undertake to visit their graves, but do not use evil 
speech ( hujr ) while you are there . 86 

Give your blessing to funeral processions and follow in them - in the forefront if 
you are on foot, and at the rear if you are riding. 

Stroke the heads of orphans , 87 visit the sick, dispense free-will offerings of charity 

improved his eating habits his prayer would be answered. We could also read tu'mah (means of subsist- 
ence; manner of gain, livelihood). 

83. Cf. Qur. 8: 1 and 49: 9-10. 

84. Only in E and C (the first of which evinces Imamite sympathies). 

85. The Egyptian editor of C opines that this applies to the obligation to help Muslim countries under 
attack by infidels. 

86. The last clause is omitted in E. Hujr here probably refers to some kind of tabu language related 
to pagan superstitions concerning supplication of the dead. As we may infer from many traditions cited 
by Wensinck (see A Handbook of Early Muhammadan Tradition [rep., Leiden, 1971], s.v. grave[s]), visiting 
cemeteries was at first prohibited by Islamic law, but later allowed. 

87. Cf. Musnad, II, 263 & 287 and V, 250. 



17 


[to the poor] ( al-sadaqat :), and love those who are good ( ahl al-khayr ). 88 

Continuously remember [the Names of God] and fear [Him] ( dawam al-dhikr wa- 
l-muraqabah) , 89 

Have your soul keep strict account of its actions ( muhasabat al-nafs 'ala l-af'al), 
external and internal. 

Become intimately familiar with the Speech of God [viz., the Qur’an] ( uns bi-kalam 
al-Lah). 

Take wisdom ( al-hikmah ) from the words of every speaker - indeed, from your 
observation of everything seen. 

Bear patiently with God's Judgments ( ahkdm al-Lah ) - for, verily, you are before 
His Eye ( bi-'ayni-hi ), as He has declared to you: "Wait patiently for your Lord's Judg- 
ment, for, indeed, you are before Our Eyes ." 90 

Give preference/your whole attention to the Command/Affair of God ( al-uthrah 
li-amr al-Lah ), 91 and resist [turning to] every secondary cause brought close ( sabab 
muqarrab) to Him . 92 

Use all of your strength (: taqah ) to satisfy the 'conditions' of God's Love and His 
Acceptance ( mahdbb al-Lah wa-maradT-hi ). 93 

Be content with [God's] Decree ( al-qada ’) - not necessarily with each thing decreed 
(i al-maqdl ), but, rather, with its Decree itself 94 - and receive with joy whatever may 
come from Him (Be He exalted !). 95 

88. That is, treat all for the best according to their circumstances. 

89. Muraqabah means to 'observe carefully, watch out for, keep an eye on', but the undertood object is God, 
not the heart (as is frequently assumed by westerners); so, unless otherwise qualified, the expression should best 
be translated as 'fear of God' in the sense of constant watchfulness. 

90. Qur. 52: 48. The verse actually applied specifically to Muhammad. 

91 . C alone reads ithar, which is a synonym of uthrah. Athira li-l-amri: 'He gave his whole attention to the 
matter to the exclusion of all other things' (see Lexicon, s.v. athira, uthrah and atharah). The double entendre 
seems to comprise both meanings: 'Give the first choice in any matter to the Command of God'; 'Give your 
whole attention to the Affair of God'. 

92. Compare this with a similar counsel among the first ten listed above. It would be equally plausible 
to read the last clause (as Addas has): 'Inquire into everything that might bring you closer to God'. 

93. Mahdbb is the plural of mahabbah in the sense of 'something which causes love'; while marad in is 
the plural of mardah (something that causes/occasions satisfaction). 

94. Mahmud indicates that this is the subject of one of the masa’il (questions) in Ibn al-'Arabl's book 
of that title (edited by him on the basis of an Azhar manuscript under the title of Ai-Tanazzuiat ai-iayiiyah 
[Cairo, 1987], p. 28, no. 46), which may also be found in the Futuhat (I, 45, II. 26-7); and Addas points 
out that the same idea is treated in the context of Job's patience in the Fusus al-hikam (see R. W. J. Austin, 
trans., The Bezels of Wisdom [New York, 1 971 ], pp. 21 6-1 7). 

95. It is very hard to see how this does not contradict the preceding clause: Does not the "thing decreed" 
proceed directly from the Divine "Decree" itself? But inasmuch as different conditioned resolutions may 
result from a transcendent imperative, some, of course, will be preferable to others. 



18 


Be the Friend/Partisan of the Real ( muwalat al-Haqq ) in being with Him always - 
'for He is with His Servants wherever they may be ' 96 - and turn with the Real 
wheresoever He may turn ; 97 

And rid yourself of falsehood ( al-batil ). 98 

Be patient in times of trial; 

Be abstemious even regarding what is lawful; 

Concern yourself with what is most important at the time; 

Seek Paradise with all longing for its being the place where you will see the Real 
(; mahall ru’at al-Haqq); 

Keep company respectfully with those undergoing tribulation; converse with the 
poor, sitting down with them in their humble quarters; and give assistance to him 
whose condition demands that you assist him. 

Be of sound heart ( salamat al-sadr ); 

Pray for the Believers in secret, and serve the Poor [in spirit] ( al-fuqara ’)." 

Be for other people and against your self, for it is when you are against it that you 
are really for it . 100 

Take joy in the goodness of the Community ( salah al-ummah ), and be sad at its 
corruption ( fasadu-ha ). 

Give priority to the one to whom God (Exalted be He!) and His Messenger have 
given priority in that [degree to which] he has been given priority; and hold back the 
one whom God and His Messenger have held back inasmuch as he has been held 
back . 101 

Now if you have 'put on' these [foregoing] Vestments (al-malabis) , then it is per- 
missible for you to be seated in the forefront of the Assemblies before God ( al-majalis 
r inda l-Lali) - Be He exalted! - and be among the People of the First Ranks ( ahl al-sufuf 
al-uwal ), 102 for this is the vestiture of those who fear God ( malabis ahl al-taqwa), which 

96. A paraphrase of Qur. 58: 7 (cf. also 57: 4). 

97. The final clause is only in E and C. 

98. Cf. Qur. 1 7: 81 : "Say: 'The Real has come and falsehood has passed away!' Truly, falsehood was ever 
passing away." The present dictum and the one preceding it may be understood in the light of Qur. 55: 26-7: 
"All that dwells on the earth is passing away ( fan in ); but the Face of your Lord shall remain ( yabqa )..." 

99. Or else the believers, having means, might repay you; while the "poor" (viz., the Sufis) have noth- 
ing with which to recompense you but their prayers, so your reward will be in Heaven (cf. Luke 1 4: 1 2-1 4 
and Matt. 6: 5-6). 

1 00. Cf. Matt. 1 6: 24-5 and John 1 2: 25. 

1 01 . Addas indicates that Ibn al-'Arabi often makes this point, particularly when enjoining the (Zahirite) 
principle of following the literal order of enumerations figuring in the Scripture (see Futuhat, I, 560, II. 21 seq.). 

102. Cf. Qur. 18: 48. In a canonical tradition the "first ranks" are said to be formed by angels in the 
presence of God (see Concordance, III, 323, I. 29). 



19 


is the “Best Vestment". 103 Strive, therefore, to make this your clothing - or, at least, 
most of it - for [the Initiate-Sufis are] all in the state of [God-fearing] . In it Shaqiq of 
Balkh, 104 for instance, invested the likes of Hatim 'the Hard-of-hearing' (al-Asamm). 105 
He was not really deaf, you know, but a certain woman came to speak with him one 
day and [as she was about to ask a question] some wind suddenly broke from her - 
that is, she farted. The poor woman was mortified before the Shaykh, of course, but 
he simply called out to her, as if she had just said something to him, "Speak louder, 
please!" - pretending that he had not heard [her fart]. So her shame was relieved as 
she said to herself, "He didn't hear me." And, thus, he was known as Hatim the Hard- 
of-hearing. 106 

[All of the Sufis] have proceeded in accordance with such Moral qualities as these, 
that being their vestiture and their ornament ( libasu-hum wa-hilyatu-hum). And I, too, 
have 'put on' such vestiture, and I have invested whom I have invested 107 accordingly, 
for God's sake - praised be He for that! 108 


[ The Qadirite Investiture] 

I HEREBY INVEST YOU by my own hand with [the Mantle of Initiation as a sign] of 
Companionship and Moral instruction, O my saintly Friend, Muwaffaq al-DIn Ahmad 
b. 'All b. Ahmad al-'Absi of Seville. 109 1 myself was invested with the Mantle at the hand 
of the Master, Jamal al-DIn Yunus b. Yahya b. Abl 1-Hasan al- 'Abbas! al-Qassar, 110 in 
the Sacred Precincts of Mecca [in 1202-03], before the Sublime Ka'bah. Yunus had 

1 03. That is, fear of God is the "best vestment" (see above, before n. 30). 

1 04. Abu 'AIT Shaqiq b. Ibrahim al-Balkhl (d. 809), a disciple of Ibrahim Ibn Ad'ham (see at nn. 1 39-40). 

105. Abu 'Abd al-Rahman Hatim al-Asamm (d. 851), also from Balkh in Khurasan. 

106. In his Tadhkirat al-awliya’ Farid al-DIn al-'Attar adds that for fifteen years, as long as the woman 
remained alive, Hatim continued to feign deafness so that no one would tell her that he really could hear 
(see A. J. Arberry, trans., Muslim Saints and Mystics [London, 1966], p. 150). 

107. "I...have put on" ( labistu ): 'I have been invested with/dressed in the mantle of initiation'; "I have 
invested" ( albastu ): 'I have attired (someone)/passed on the mantle of initiation.' From here on I will 
translate these verbs according to their technical connotations. 

1 08. C ends at this point. 

1 09. I have been unable to obtain further information on this person. He is thus named as the addressee 
of the Nasab in most of the extant manuscripts (but another name, given by Addas, is substituted in those 
sources based on E). Conceivably he is related (a grandson?) to the Ahmad al-lshblll portrayed in the 
R. Ruh al-quds as a childhood neighbor and friend of Ibn al-'Arabl, who later died in Egypt (see Sufis of 
Andalusia, pp. 91-5, no. 10). 

110. D. 121 1 . Addas notes that he was a well-known Qadirite muhaddith from Baghdad, under whom 
Ibn al-'Arabl studied traditions in Mecca (see "La Filiation spirituelle," p. 41, n. 123, for references). This 
was actually the third time Ibn al-'Arabl had received the mantle. 



20 


received it from the Master of the Age, 'Abd al-Qadir b. Abl Salih b. 'Abd al-Lah al Jill, 111 
who received it from Abu Sa'Id al-Mubarakb. 'All al-Mukharriml, 112 who, in turn, had 
it from Abu l-Hasan 'All al-Hakkarl, 113 who had it from Abu 1-Faraj al-TarsusI, 114 who 
had it from Abu 1-Fadl 'Abd al-Wahid al-Tamlml, 115 who had it from Abu Bakr 
Muhammad b. Jahdar al-Shibll, 116 who was a companion of ( sahiba ) Abu 1-Qasim al- 
Junayd, 117 whose moral instruction he followed ( ta’addaba bi-hi ). 

Al-Junayd, in turn, was the companion of his maternal uncle, Sari al-Saqatl, 118 
whose moral instruction he followed, as Sari had been the companion of Ma'ruf al- 
Karkhl, 119 whose moral instruction he followed. Similarly, Ma'ruf accompanied and 
followed 'All [al-Rida], 120 who accompanied and followed his father, Musa [al-Kazim], 121 
who accompanied and followed his father, Ja'far [al-Sadiq], 122 who accompanied and 
followed his father, Muhammad [al-Baqir], 123 who accompanied and followed his 
father, 'All [Zayn al-' Abidin], 124 who accompanied and followed his father, al-Husayn 
b. 'All, 125 who accompanied and followed both his grandfather, Muhammad, the 
Messenger of God (May God bless and keep him!), and his father, 'All b. Abl Talib, 126 
who also accompanied and followed the Messenger of God. 

111. Known best as 'Abd al-Qadir al-JTIanT, in whose name the QadirTyah order of Sufism was founded. 
He died in Baghdad in 1 1 66 (one year after the birth of Ibn al-'ArabT). 

1 1 2. Hanbalite legal scholar, judge and head of a law school in Baghdad (d. 1 1 1 9). 

1 1 3. 'AIT b. Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Qurashl al-Hakkarl (ft. late 1 1th century). The nisbah is Kurdish, 
related to the region south of Lake Van. Addas supposes him to be the same individual listed in the second 
khirqah, below, as the initiator of Ibn Khafff (d. 982; see at n. 1 34, infra ; and Quest, pp. 31 6-1 7), but that 
would hardly be chronologically possible. 

1 14. I have not been able to further identify this individual. His surname relates him to Tarsus in Cilicia. 

1 15. 'Abd al-Wahid b. 'Abd al-'Azfz al-Tamlml (d. circa 101 1-19), a Hanbalite scholar of Baghdad (see 
Louis Massignon, The Passion of al-Haliaj [rep., Princeton, 1982], vol. II, p. 1 35). 

1 1 6. See n. 40, above. One source inserts at this point: "Down to here the [formal] investiture of the 
mantle ( libas ) extends, and what follows is [informal] companionship ( suhbah ) only" - which, indeed, seems 
to be the case. 

1 1 7. D. 91 0 in Baghdad. For an account of al-Shibll's apprenticeship to al-Junayd, see Muslim Saints and 
Mystics, pp. 278-9. 

1 1 8. Abu l-Hasan Sari b. al-Mughallis al-SagatT of Baghdad (d. 867). 

1 1 9. Abu Mahfuz Ma'ruf b. Fayruz al-KarkhT of Baghdad (d. 81 5). 

120. Abu l-Hasan 'AIT b. Musa al-Rida (d. 818), the eighth ShT'ite imam. The legend that had Ma'ruf 
converted to Islam by 'AIT al-Rida is generally rejected by modern scholarship. He was more credibly said 
to have been the disciple of Da’ud al-Ta’T (d. circa 782). 

121. Abu l-Hasan Musa b. Ja'far al-Kazim (d. 799), the seventh imam. 

122. Abu 'Abd al-Lah Ja'far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq (d. 765), the celebrated sixth imam. 

123. Abu Ja'far Muhammad b. 'AIT al-Baqir (d. 735), the fifth imam. 

124. Abu Muhammad 'AIT b. al-Husayn, known as Zayn al-'AbidTn (the ornament of the worshippers), 
the fourth imam (d. 71 2-1 3). 

1 25. The third imam (after his elder brother, al-Hasan), who was martyred at Karbala on 'Ashura’ in 680. 

1 26. The cousin of the Prophet and husband of his daughter, Fatimah, the fourth and last Rightly-guided 



21 


And Muhammad 'took from' the Angel Gabriel (Upon him be peace!), and Gabriel 
'took from' God (Be He exalted!). I asked Shaykh Yunus: "What did (Muhammad/ 
Gabriel] 'take' from [Gabriel/God]?" and he replied: "I asked Shaykh Abd al-Qadir [that 
same question] - or, it was asked of him - and he declared: 'He took from Him Know- 
ledge and Moral instruction ( al-'ilm wa-l-adab)."’ 

[ The Mahmudite Investiture] 

LIKEWISE, I hereby invest you, also, with the Mantle which I received (in the city of 
Fez at the Azhar Mosque in the quarter of the Horse Well in 593 [= 1197]) 127 at the 
hand of Abu 'Abd al-Lah Muhammad b. Qasim b. 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Abd al-Karlm 
al-Tamlml 128 of Fez and from Taqi al-DIn 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'All b. Maymun b. Abb 
al-Tawzarl of Egypt. 129 Both of them told me that they received the Mantle from Abu 
1-Fath Mahmud b. Ahmad b. Mahmud al-Mahmudl, 130 who received it from Abu 1- 
Hasan 'All b. Muhammad of Basra, 131 who had it from Abu 1-Fath b. Shaykh al- 
shuyukh, 132 who had it from Abu Ishaq b. Shahriyar al-Murshidi, 133 who had it from 


caliph and first ShT'ite imam, who was murdered in Kufa in 661 . 

1 27. This information is supplied only in E, and it may well be a false interpolation by the copyist, since 
the same place and date is mentioned in the Futuhat (II, 486, II. 23-4; IV, 503, II. 23-5; and I, 491, I. 7), as 
Addas points out. 

128. D. 1206. He was the sometime imam of the Azhar Mosque in Fez (see ibid., IV, 503 [23-5]), all of 
whose writings Ibn al-'ArabT studied, according to his declaration in the Ijazah li-l-Malik ai-Muzaffar 
(A. R. BadawT, ed., "Autobibliograffa", in Ai-Andaius, 20 [1955], p. 120). He also received traditions from 
him - Prophetary hadlth and akhbar of Sufis of Fez (see Futuhat, IV, 541 [22-3] & 549 [25-6]) - which 
al-Tamimi collected from many teachers over a fifteen-year tour of the East (see Ibn al-Abbar, Al-Takmilah 
li-Kitab al-Silah [Madrid, 1886], vol. I, pp. 374-5, no. 1064). Ibn al-Abbar, by the way, did not have a 
favorable opinion of al-Tamlmi's accuracy as a transmitter, accusing him of publishing "conjectures and 
errors" (awham wa-aghlat ). 

129. AI-MisrJ is found only in al-Ghimarl's text (see n. 5; and cf. n. 147), who also asserts that this inves- 
titure took place in 1190. Addas shows that al-Tawzarl is the 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'AIT...b. Maymun. ..al- 
QastallanT treated briefly by Ibn al-Abbar (in ibid., vol. II, p. 591 , no. 1 654), and gives some further particulars 
about his family (which hailed from Tozeur/QastTliyah in southern Tunisia) in Quest, p. 143 (and nn. 42- 
4). The only other occasion known to me that Ibn al-'ArabT mentions him, in Futuhat, I, 186-7 (translated 
below, n. 147) brings up a whole other problem which is outlined in Quest, pp. 144-5, but which need 
not concern us at this time. 

1 30. Or: Abu l-Hasan b. Ahmad Fath Mahmud al-Mahmudl (see The Passion of al-Hallaj, vol. II, p. 477). 

131.1 have not verified the identities of this or the next individual listed. 

1 32. The office of shaykh al-shuyukh was ostensibly in charge of the general superintendence of Sufi 
convents for a particular city or region (see ibid., vol. I, p. 44, for an interesting case). 

1 33. Or: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim al-Murshid b. Shahriyar al-KazarunT (d. 1033), founder of the KazarunTyah/ 
MurshidTyah order in Fars. He was a descendent of Salman al-FarisT, and, according to Massignon, his khirqah 
extended to Salman as well as Uways (see ibid., vol. II, pp. 186-7). 



22 


Hasan or Husayn al-Akkar, 134 who had it from Abu 'Abd al-Lah Ibn Khafif, 135 who was 
the companion of Ja'far al-Hadhdha’. 136 

Al-Hadhdha’, in turn, was the companion of his master, Abu 'Amr al-Istakhrl, 137 
who was the companion of his master, Abu Turab al-Nakhshabl, 138 who accompanied 
his master, Shaqiq of Balkh, 139 who accompanied his master, Ibrahim Ibn Ad'ham, 140 
who accompanied Musa b. Zayd al-Ra'I, 141 who accompanied Uways al-Qaranl, 142 who 
accompanied 'Umar b. al-Khattab 143 and 'All b. Abl Talib, 144 who both accompanied 
the Messenger of God (May God bless and keep him!). 

[The Khadirite Investiture] 

LIKEWISE, I invest you, also, with the Mantle which I received at the hand of Abu 1- 
Hasan 'All b. 'Abd al-Lah Ibn Jami' 145 (in his garden in al-Miqla, on the outskirts of 
Mosul, in the year 601 [= 1204-05]). 146 Ibn Jami' had been the companion of al-Khadir 
(Peace be upon him!), whose Moral instruction he followed and from whom he acquired 


1 34. Thus in all of the sources. He is Abu 'AIT Husayn b. Muhammad b. al-Akkar (or: 'Akkar) Bazyar FTruzabadhT 
al-Jurl (d. 1 001 ; see ibid.). Cf. n. 1 1 3. 

1 35. See n. 41, above; and ibid., pp. 182-6 et seq. Ibn KhafTf was also said to have received the mantle 
of Ruwaym b. Ahmad (d. 915). 

1 36. D. 952. The name (meaning 'the cobbler') is given thus in most of the Nasab sources, but it was 
also freguently spelled al-Hadda’ (the cameleer). 

1 37. The name is thus in most sources, but the correct reading is perhaps Abu 'Umar - in which case 
the reference could be to the son of 'Umar b. Shalluyah al-Istakhrl (see ibid., p. 1 10, n. 1 7). 

1 38. D. 859. He was a celebrated exponent of tawakkal (trust in God), who was devoured by lions in 
the desert. 

1 39. See n. 1 04. 

140. Abu Ishag Ibrahim b. Ad'ham al-Tamlml al-'ljll of Balkh (d. circa 782), who left Khurasan for Syria. 

141.1 have not been able to identify this individual, whose surname means 'the shepherd'. We might specu- 
late that the name is a confabulation inspired by the early precedent of Abu Halim b. Salim al-Ra'T, who was 
a companion of Salman al-FarisT and who, according to al-HujwTrT, was renowned for performing a miracle 
like that of Moses in Qur. 7: 1 60 (see R. A. Nicholson, trans., The Kashf al-Mahjub [London, 1 936], pp. 90-1). 

142. Uways b. 'Amir b. Jaz’ b. Malik al-QaranT of Yemen (d. after 657), the very type of the independ- 
ent, 'masterless' wall. 

143. The second Rightly-guided caliph, who was assassinated in 644. 

144. See n. 126. Actually, according to legend, it was 'Umar and 'All who sought the company of 
Uways in Yemen (see my paper, "The Uways! Spirit of Autodidactic Sainthood as the Breath of the Merci- 
ful," forthcoming in this journal). 

145. He was a disciple of 'All al-Mutawakkil and of the well-known Sufi, Abu 'Abd al-Lah QadTb al-Ban 
(see n. 1 47). 

1 46. This and the parenthetic statement at the end of the paragraph are found only in E, and they may 
have been added by the copyist on the basis of the material found in Futuhat, I, 1 87 [1-3] (see next note). 



23 


Knowledge. (On the same spot that Ibn Jami' donned the Mantle he invested me with 
it, and in the exact same manner - without addition or omission ). 147 

[A Fourth Investiture] 

SIMILARLY, I myself had also been the companion of al-Khadir (Peace be upon him!), 
whose Moral instruction I followed and from whom I learned [by way of advice 
(■ wasJyah ) which he entrusted to me orally ] 148 correct submission to the pronounce- 
ments of masters ( al-taslim li-maqalat al-shukukh ) - as to the letter [if not the spirit], 
'from his mouth to my mouth ' 149 - and other points of Knowledge . 150 (I have seen 


147. Ibn al-'Arabl describes this investiture (signified by the placing of a small cottom cap) in his entry 
devoted to Ibn Jami' in the Durrah al-fakhirah (see Sufis of Andalusia, p. 157). In addition, the following 
account occurs in Futuhat, I, 1 86-7 (translated also by Henry Corbin in Creative Imagination in the Sufism of 
Ibn 'ArabT[Princeton, 1 969], pp. 64-5; and in Quest, pp. 1 45-6): "One of our shaykhs had consociated with 
al-Khadir. He was 'AIT b. 'Abd al-Lah Ibn Jami' - a companion of 'AIT al-Mutawakkil and Abu 'Abd al-Lah 
QadTb al-Ban - who used to live in al-Migla, outside Mosul, in a garden he owned. Al-Khadir had invested 
him with the Mantle in the presence of QadTb al-Ban, and the Shaykh, in turn, transmitted it to me in the 
very same place in his garden [but indoors, according to the Durrah description] and observing the same 
procedure that al-Khadir had used in his investiture of him. I had already received the Mantle of al-Khadir - 
but in a way guite different from this - at the hand of our companion, TagT al-DTn 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'AIT 
b. Maymun b. Abb al-TawzarT, who received it in Egypt from Sadr al-DTn Ibn Hamawayh, the Shaykh al- 
shuyukh [of Damascus (d. 1219)], whose grandfather, in turn, had it from al-Khadir. 

"From that time onward I professed the SufT doctrine of the Mantle of Initiation ( libas al-khirqah ) and I 
invested other people with it, since I saw how al-Khadir had esteemed it. But before that I had not espoused 
the doctrine of the Mantle as it is generally known today. For, really, the Mantle with us [latter-day Stiffs] 
is simply a symbol for Companionship, Moral instruction and 'Assimilation to the Divine Character-traits' 
( al-takhalluq ) - for which reason no Vestiture going all the way back to the Messenger of God will be 
found but, rather, only Companionship and Moral instruction. And this is all that is meant by the 'Robe of 
God-fearing.' 

"It is the custom among Masters of the spiritual States ( ashab ai-ahwaf) that when they discern a 
deficiency in some matter in one of their companions and they want to perfect his State for him, the shaykh 
[mentally] becomes one with him ( ittahada bi-hi). Then, when he has done so, the shaykh takes the 
garment that he was wearing when he was in that State, removes it and casts it ( afragha-hu ) on the man 
so that the [psychic power of the] State flows into him, perfecting him. That, then, is the 'Investiture' as it 
is known among us and transmitted by the Fully-realized ( al-muhaqqiqun ) among our shaykhs." 

148. Only in E. 

149. Nass an min fi-hi ila fTya. That is, submit to the rightful authorities externally even if they are wrong 
(unless, of course, it is a matter of Divine law), but reserve your internal assent, allowing al-Khadir to speak 
through your mouth, as it were, with the proper intent (cf. Luke 12:11-12). For a description of the 
circumstances in which al-Khadir gave this instruction to Ibn al-'ArabT in Seville in 1 196, see Futuhat, I, 
336-7, translated by Addas in Quest, pp. 63-4. 

1 50. At this juncture all of the sources except for E (and those based on it) proceed to the sentence after 
the next, then conclude with the 'addendum'. 



24 


al-Khadir perform three miracles: I saw him walk on the water, 'roll up' the earth, and 
pray in the air ). 151 

All of these [four above-mentioned Masters, along with al-Khadir] have authorized 
me to invest with the Mantle of Initiation whomever I will . 152 Then may my Friend 
[Muwaffaq al-DIn Ahmad] (May God grant him success!) invest with this Mantle in 
this same Lineage whomever he will and whomsoever he like - young or old, male 
or female - of the Believers, in accordance with the above-mentioned condition . 153 

God willing, I will now quote one of our poems on this Mantle and this special 
discipline : 154 


1 51 . In Futuhat, I, 1 86 (1 2-1 8), Ibn al-'Arabl describes a memorable moonlit night on a boat in the harbor 
of Tunis when he saw al-Khadir walking to him on the water. After talking to the Shaykh in a mode of 
expression peculiar to him, al-Khadir saluted him and suddenly traversed the distance to a lighthouse over 
two miles away in two or three steps. This supernatural transport over space is what is meant by 'rolling, 
or folding up the earth'. The story of al-Khadir's praying in mid-air is recounted in 11.18-26 on the same 
page (both passages are translated by Austin in Sufis of Andalusia, pp. 27 & 28-9). 

152. This and the last sentence of the preceding paragraph are only found in E. 

153. This presumably refers to the general condition of moral fitness (summed up in the fear of God) 
stated at the conclusion of the list of counsels ("Now if you have put on these vestments..."), making one 
suited to join the Sufi brotherhood. The original recension of the Nasab al-khirqah probably ended here. 

1 54. The poem, minus the first verse, may be found in the Diwan (p. 52, no. 1 29), where it is the first of 
26 occasional pieces devoted to the subject of investiture. The metre is al-baslt. 



25 


[The Mantle of God-fearing] 

Put on the Mantle, for Man's "Best Vestment" is God-fearing, 
which is the truest Religion and the strongest World. 

None fear God except every discerning one, 

chosen and guided, whom God has distinguished: 

He interrupts the night with Praise unto his Lord, 
bleary-eyed [from rising] in the darkest hours; 

He entreats: "My Master, O End-all of my hope, 

who but his Lord shall have Mercy on His slave?" 

God is much more Kind than this created Nature 

and Attribute; for if they call Him, He complies ! 155 

Were it not for Him, earth would not break out in laughter 
with her flowers, nor reproving clouds overcome her. 

God it is Who prefers [that a thing come into being], 

God Who completes, balances and sets it in order. 

O Essence of Religion, You are All of Religion: 

Heaven is redolent with the fragrance of Your Name ! 156 


[Addendum ] 157 

There is no condition in the investiture of this Mantle, or Companionship, that it can 
only be received from one person. No one ever imposed such a condition. On the 
contrary, one Sufi is known to have said that whoever wanted to see three-hundred 
men in one need only look at him, for he had been the companion of three-hundred 
masters and he had acquired a Moral quality ( khulq ) from each one. And just look at 
the Epistle [on Sufism] by al-Qushayrl , 158 whenever he mentions any one of the 
Sufis - he hardly ever does so without saying that "he accompanied Such-a-one and 


155. This line is garbled in the Dlwan. "Nature": sajlyah. "Attribute": na't. These are both 'creation' as 
the manifestation of the merciful Divine Essence. 

1 56. The poem has only been included in those sources which are based on E. 

157. I am not convinced that this would-be 'epilogue' is actually the work of Ibn al-'Arabl (for reasons 
which I will give in a later study). 

158. The Risalah ft 'ilm al-tasawwuf, by Abu l-Qasim 'Abd al-KarTm al-Qushayrl (d. 1074), is one of the 
standard manuals of Sufism from the middle-classical period of consolidation. It has been translated by 
Richard Gramlich as Dos Sendschreiben al-Qushayris uber das Sufitum (Stuttgart, 1 989). 



26 


Such-another." Investiture of the Mantle is nothing but Companionship and Moral 
instruction, and that is unrestricted. But a group of ignorant 'Sufis' ( ta’ifat juhala’) 
having no knowledge has sprung up, and they imagine that a man may not receive 
investiture except from a single person. But no one ever said that before. God is the 
Giver of success! There is no Lord other than He. 


Appendix 


"Ibn 'Arabi: Le Livre de la filiation spirituelle" [Nasab al-khirqah ]. Translated by 
Claude Addas. r Ayn al-Haydt, 5, 1999. 44 pages. 

The recent annotated French translation of Ibn al-'Arabl's K. Nasab al-khirqah by 
Claude Addas, entitled "Le Livre de la filiation spirituelle", marks the culmination of 
that scholar's committed study of this important work which began with an initial 
translation of it as part of her Master's thesis ( memoire de Maitrise ), submitted in 1980. 
With the publication of Addas's revised doctoral dissertation, La Quete du soufre rouge , 
in 1989 some passages and other significant information gleaned from the Nasab was 
made available for the first time in any western language. 1 In the subsequent English 
version of her book (Quest, 1993) a schematic silsilah of the 'Akbarian' mantle was 
featured as an appendix (pp. 316-17) diagramming all four lines of master-initiators 
claimed by Ibn al- 'Arabi as his formal spiritual pedigree and detailed by him in the 
Nasab (and Futuhat al-makkiyah) . With the appearance of "La Filiation spirituelle" 
(including critical introduction and a Note complementaire on the hierurgy of Sufi 
initiation by the translator's esteemed father, Michel Chodkiewicz) the entire Nasab 
al-khirqah has finally become accessible to non-specialists, marking yet another mile- 
stone in Addas's career of original scholarship. 

The quality of translation is exemplary (a fine comprehension of the Arabic ren- 
dered lucidly in French), but the greatest asset of Addas, as I have observed elsewhere, 
is her extraordinary familiarity with an extensive range of Ibn al-'Arabl's writings, 

1 . Although Ralph Austin had read the Nasab in manuscript (see his Sufis of Andalusia [London, 1971], 
p. 39, n.1), and, of course, Osman Yahia had described it in Histoire et classification de I'oeuvre d'lbn ' Arab T 
(Damascus, 1964), pp. 407-8, no. 530. 



27 


particularly the whole gargantuan corpus of the Meccan Revelations. An instance of this 
capacity for in-depth contextualizing may be appreciated in her note 71, where an 
obscure passage in the Nasab concerning the Prophet Muhammad's perpetual chant- 
ing ( taghann in ) of the Qur’an is explicated by Addas with reference to descriptions in 
the Futuhat of the 'pentecostal' descent of the Scripture on the Prophet's followers, 
the awliya’, by whose tongues his blessed enunciation may be said to live on. Some 
of the translator's comments are less illuminating but illustrative, nonetheless; as when 
she points out (in n. 75) that Qur. 7: 32 ("the Adornment of God which He brings forth 
for His servants", quoted in the Nasab ) is cited in the Futuhat (vol. I, p. 560, 11. 24 seq.) 
as a prooftext in support of Ibn al-'Arabl's (typically Zahirite) literalist rejection of 
luxury-taxes. Other examples of researcher-friendly footnotes: 80, 82, 91, 94, 99, 102, 
104 and 118. 2 

Apart from the rhymed-prose prologue and densely- woven beginning of the work, 
most of the Nasab al-khirqah is relatively painless to read - at least by Akbarian stand- 
ards. The 'genealogies' may offer little of interest to any but historians and special- 
ists (who can argue about their tenability and whether or not a chain is only as strong 
as its weakest link, after all) but the heart of the book, the long series of moral instruc- 
tions, or exhortations ( wasaya ), will be found refreshingly attractive to the general 
reader - precious counsels to be cherished in practice by serious students of the Shaykh. 
The more substantive differences between Addas's presentation of the Nasab and 
my own (on pp. 1-33 of this issue) will be treated in a later study incorporating the 
Arabic text. In this review I will only address some technical matters and a rather 
important point of general interpretation affecting the whole perspective of Ibn 
al-'Arabl's various receptions of the mantle of initiation. 

As a fellow text-critic I would have liked to see from my colleague a fuller descrip- 
tion of the sources she used to establish her text. But since I myself thought best to 
burden the reader with even fewer technical details, let me say more precisely that 
Addas's account of two of her sources might have been less misleading. Specifically, 
MS. Esad Efendi 1507 (E), which she declares as her basic text, is not as good as her 
brief description tends to imply, and the 1987 Cairo edition of A. R. H. Mahmud (C) 
not really so bad as she states (p. 24). In fact, the two are quite comparable, sharing 
most of the additional content not found in other sources, and they differ primarily 

2. While Addas has made a promising start, a desideratum which remains would be a thorough critical 
comparison of the teachings in the Nasab with those of Ibn al-'Arabl's other practical treatises, such as Al- 
Amr al-muhkam and Kunh ma la budda li-l-mund min-hu, as well as the wosd/d-chapter (560) of the Futuhat 
(IV, 444seg.). 



28 


in two respects only: E is marred by a number of careless errors of the copyist (even 
evincing a non-native grasp of Arabic grammar), whereas C is quite scrupulously 
printed; 3 but the Cairo edition does suffer from several gaping lacunae - notably, the 
saj' prologue and the chains of transmission - and, so, only about two-thirds of the 
Nasab is represented in C. Most of the absent material was provided in Ahmad b. 
Muhammad al-Ghimarl's very serviceable study, Al-Burhan al-jalT (from which C 
was excerpted), published in 1979-80 in the journal, Lived’ al-Islam (see n. 5 of my 
translation), however, and Addas might have avoided a problem in her reading of 
the first two investitures by consulting that publication (see my n. 113). As it is, her 
suggestion (in n.90) that a missing passage describing Ibn al-'Arabl's empirical method 
of initiation was deliberately "omitted" from C is a bit unfair since, in fact, a compa- 
rable description from Futuhat, I: 186-7, was quoted at length by al-Ghimarl - who, 
by the way, was personally very favorable towards Ibn al-'Arabl (as was Mahmud). The 
manuscript basis of C is not identified 4 but, as far as can be determined, it was quite 
as good as any other primary source I have examined. 

As for E, although it does, indeed, appear to be a genuine copy of an original tran- 
script of the Nasab read before Ibn al-'Arabl in the summer of 633/1236 at his home 
(with his son, Sa'd al-DIn Abu Sa'ud, and others present) by a disciple, Ahmad b. 'Abd 
al-Lah al-'AlawI of Hama - that does not necessarily mean that it was well copied or 
that the form in which we have it now is free of interpolations. The full name of 
the original copyist (see "La Filiation spirituelle," at n. 121) makes clear that he was 
a shafif, and there is evidence in E that either he or the second scribe harbored Imamite 
sympathies (see n. 84 in my translation). That al-'AlawI was a serious student of the 
Shaykh al-Akbar is proven by the existence of sama's certifying his reading of portions 
of the Futuhat. But that really has no bearing on the credibility of the second (that is, 
the actual) copyist of E, who may have been a very late inheritor of the original manu- 
script. It is unlikely that MS. Esad Ef. 1507, for all its interest and value, is nearly as 
old as MS. §ehid Ali Pa§a 1344, which dates from the mid-10th/16th century. 

A more significant criticism that I have of Addas's representation of the khirqah 
motif does not relate, strictly speaking, to the content of the Nasab itself but, rather, 
to her reading of the important passage from Futuhat, I: 186-7, translated by her 

3. For instance, C is the only source to give the correct reading of la tajza'u (be not anxious), where 
the verb is the contrary of isbir ( be patient) in the line following (see n. 67 of my translation). All of the 
manuscript sources contain at least as many mistakes as the Cairo edition. 

4. As al-Ghimarl studied at the Azhar, we may conjecture that his source was MS. Azhar 1070 [33580], 
ff. 29-36 (mentioned by Yahia). 



29 


in Quest (p. 145) and in "La Filiation spirituelle" (pp. 14-15). In the first version she 
left out the lines referring to Ibn al-'ArabI's investiture at the hand of al-Tawzarl - 
(compare my translation in n. 147), thus giving the false impression that what was 
mentioned before, the investiture by Ibn Jami' in Mosul, was what caused the Shaykh 
to "revise his opinion ... of the libs al-khirqah." (She reiterates the same interpreta- 
tion in "La Filiation spirituelle," p. 16, even though there the entire passage was 
given.) But in the original Arabic it is the Khadirite investiture of al-Tawzarl which is 
clearly the point of reference of the words, "from that time". The precise date and place 
of that first initiation remains uncertain (and the Nasab material only makes the ques- 
tion more complicated). Addas suggests that it took place in Seville in 595/1196 on 
the authority of a single anonymous manuscript (A) of dubious provenience, supplied 
to her by Osman Yahia. Al-Ghimari's source, however, asserts that the date was 586/ 
1190; and Austin, for his part, assumed that it was six years earlier, when Ibn al- 'Arabi 
first encountered the mysterious, immortal Khadir. But whatever the case, it was 
obviously that first Khadirite initiation in the Maghrib that was the occasion of Ibn 
al-'Arabrs realizing the legitimacy of the practice of investiture (despite its not being 
an actual Prophetic institution, as he himself stipulates). 

Finally, I should mention that Ayn al-Hayat is a recently-founded journal of the 
tariqah Naqshbandiyah, published privately in Italy and with a limited circulation. 
As the quality of the contributions (from such scholars as Addas and Hamid Algar) 
has so far been very high, there is certain to be an unrequited demand for issues of the 
journal, which, at least, will hopefully be available in the US through Interlibrary Loan 
(otherwise, copies may perhaps be acquired through the good offices of the librarian 
of the Muhyiddin Ibn 'ArabI Society Oxford). 

Gerald Elmore 


Article and review both first published in the Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi 
Society , Volume XXVI, 1999, pp. 1-33 and 133-7, respectively. © Gerald Elmore, 
1999. You may download and print this article to read for your own personal 
use, but you may not copy or republish it without written permission from the 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society. 





