
ARAB I 


Study, translation, 
transliteration and Arabic text 


SUHA TAJI FAROUKI 


A Prayer for Spiritual 
Elevation and Protection 



Muhyiddm Ibn 'Arabi 

A Prayer for Spiritual 
Elevation and Protection 


al-Dawr al- a la (Hizb al-wiqaya ) 




Study, translation, transliteration and Arabic text 
SUU A TAJ I -FAROUKI 


ANQA PUBLISHING • OXFORD 


IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE 
MUHYIDDIN IBN 'ARABI SOCIETY 


Published by Anqa Publishing 


PO Box 1178 
Oxford 0X2 8YS, UK 
www.ibn-arabi.com 


In association with the 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society 
www.ibnarabisociety.org 


© Suha Taji-Farouki, 2006 


Suha Taji-Farouki has asserted her moral right 
under the Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act, 1988, to be identified as the author 
of this work. 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of the publisher. 


Cover design: Michael Tiernan 

The front cover design incorporates the prayer title 
from Yazma Bagi§lar 2180. 


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data. 

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 

ISBN-10: 0 9534513 0 5 
ISBN-13: 978 0 9534513 0 2 


Printed in Great Britain by Biddles Limited, 
www.biddles.co.uk 


To God alone belong the Most Beautiful Names, 
so call upon Ilim through them 

Qur’an 7: 180 


I take refuge in the Perfect Words of God from 
the evil of that which He has created 

A saying of the Prophet Muhammad 


Whoever recites [this prayer] will be like the 
sun and the moon among the stars 
Muhammad al-Damum, 

al-Durr al-thamjn li-sharh Dawr al-a' Id li-stdi MuhyT al-Din 



CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements viii 

Foreword by Michel Chodkiewicz ix 

Introduction 1 

1 The Dawr Today 

Contemporary contexts 5 

Damascus 5 

Istanbul 8 

The United Kingdom 9 

2 A Prayer across Time 

Historical dimensions 17 

Transmitters of the prayer 22 

Chains and authorisations 44 

Windows onto Islamic culture and thought 48 

3 The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

Properties 69 

The text and its contents 74 

Translation and Arabic text 79 

Transliteration 98 

Appendix: Manuscript copies and chains of transmission 119 

Bibliography 127 

Index 135 


vii 


Acknowledgements 


The author would like to thank The Institute of Ismaili Studies 
(London) for generously supporting this work, the staff of the 
Suleymaniye Library (Istanbul) for their help and hospitality, and 
those who gave their time for interviews or discussions. Thanks are 
also due to Stephen Hirtenstein and Michael Tiernan. 


FOREWORD 


MICHEL CHODKIEWICZ 

Born in Spain and having died in Syria, like the ‘blessed tree’ men- 
tioned in the ‘Light’ verse of the Qur’an Ibn 'Arabl (1164-1240) is 
‘neither of the east nor of the west’, for he belongs equally to both. 
Recognized as the Spiritual Master par excellence (al-Shaykh al- 
Akbar), he has been a source of inspiration and a definitive reference- 
point for the Muslim mystical tradition from Andalusia to China 
for more than eight centuries. Christian Europe, which since the 
Middle Ages had passionately studied so many Arabic authors, was 
for a long time unaware of him. It had to wait until the end of the 
nineteenth century before it began to discover some of the hundreds 
of works he has left us, and even then this interest was at first limited 
to narrow circles of Orientalists. 

In contrast, the last few decades of the twentieth century have 
seen a sudden increase in the number of translations, critical edi- 
tions, studies and commentaries on his works. Even more surpris- 
ingly, their audience has gradually extended to encompass readers 
who, a priori, have felt no particular attraction to Islamic culture, 
and indeed appeared to have no reason to be interested in writings of 
such intimidating depth. Undoubtedly, such readers felt that an aca- 
demic approach which focused on the doctrinal authority Ibn 'Arabl 
has exercised over sufism took into account only one aspect of the 
man. As an eminent figure of sainthood the Shaykh al-Akbar is thus 
not only a Lesemeister : he is also - and even more so, a Lebemeister ; 
since he teaches us not only how to think, but how to live. 

Witness, for example, the care he has shown in the five hundred 
and sixtieth (and final) chapter of his Meccan Revelations ( al-Futuhat 
al-makkTya). Here, at the end of thousands of pages, where a ver- 
tiginous metaphysics is developed in a language of extreme technical 


IX 


Foreword 

precision, he gathers together, using very simple words, the rules of 
conduct from which, he tells us, both the wayfarer (al-salik) and the 
one who has arrived at his destination ( al-zvdsil ) may benefit. For him 
- and for every spiritual master worthy of the name - the knowledge 
of the saints must take hold of the whole person. It is not addressed 
to the intellect alone. 

It is for this very reason too that, within the immense Akbarian 
corpus, one finds alongside numerous scholarly treatises some quite 
short texts, which at first sight seem to fall within the domain of 
simple devotional literature. Yet the reality is utterly different. These 
prayers (salawat, ahzdb, awrad ), transmitted from master to disciple, 
are much more than pious litanies. They are inspired invocations, 
each structured around a series of Divine Names. Every Name con- 
ceals secrets and powers that are its own: it must arise at a precise 
moment in the recitation in order for it to be effective. Such effec- 
tiveness is not magic, however. It presupposes that certain condi- 
tions are satisfied, the most important of which is purity of intention. 
In addition, the diversity of these forms of prayer and the modes of 
their use - whether regularly or occasionally, at a particular time or 
not, recited alone or in groups etc. - reflect the variety of individual 
or collective situations, and of interior dispositions. 

It is one of these prayers, al-Dawr al-a' Id (known also as the Hizb 
al-wiqdya), which can be found at the centre of the little book before 
you. At the centre, for it is surrounded by much precious informa- 
tion. Suha Taji-Farouki does not limit herself simply to establishing 
the text with rigorous exactitude, and providing a translation and 
transliteration of it. Combining a meticulous examination of writ- 
ten sources with patient fieldwork, she tells for the first time the 
long history of this prayer, identifying each of the personalities in 
the chains of transmission. Based upon many testimonies and from 
her own observations, she shows above all that the practice of the 
Dawr lives on today in very diverse milieux. With as much know- 
ledge as empathy, she thus demonstrates the continuing currency of 
Ibn 'Arabl’s teaching. 

Paris, 2006 
x 


INTRODUCTION 


There is a growing body of critical editions, translations and analy- 
ses of the works of Ibn 'Arabl, yet relatively little attention has been 
paid to dimensions of his corpus of a more specifically liturgical or 
devotional character. 1 The most extensive collection of prayers at- 
tributed to him arises in the major compilation of Sunni devotional 
texts by the Naqshbandi-Khalidi Ahmed Ziya’tiddin Gumushanevi 
(d.1894), known by the title Majmu'at al-ahzab? While a few of 
these prayers have since been published and some such publications 
claim, if implicitly, to present critical editions, editors often provide 
scant (or no) information concerning the manuscripts on which they 
have drawn, 3 and it is consequently difficult in some cases to be cer- 
tain of their origin or precision. A critical compilation/edition of all 
these prayers, that rationalises titles and texts, addresses questions of 
attribution and explores the accompanying commentary tradition, is 
still to be produced. 

As a modest contribution to this end (and taking into account 
the relatively few studies of Muslim and sufi prayer and prayer texts 
more generally), this study focuses on a single small prayer which 
has as its full title al-Dawr al-a' la al-muqarrib ila kulli maqam al-a' la 
(The Most Elevated Cycle that brings one close to Every Station 
of The Most High), often contracted to al-Dawr al-a' la (The Most 
Elevated Cycle) or Dawr al-a' la (The Cycle of The Most High): it is 
also known as Hizb al-wiqaya (The Prayer of Protection). 4 As in the 
case of other prayers attributed to him, this does not appear in Ibn 
'Arabl’s bibliographic records (the fihris and ijaza ) and is not men- 
tioned in any of his works. Yet as one contemporary sufi shaykh and 
specialist in his thought has put it, ‘there is a consensus among the 
people of the Way of God [ahl tariq Allah] concerning its attribution 
to the Shaykh al-Akbar.” A clear majority of the substantial number 
of manuscript copies surveyed for this study explicitly attribute the 


i 


Introduction 


prayer to Ibn 'Arabl either in the title or through a chain of transmis- 
sion. Of those that do not make such an attribution, none attribute 
it to any other author. Given this and evidence of its widespread 
circulation and use both past and present, it represents an important 
element in any project to delimit and clarify the specifically liturgi- 
cal dimension of Ibn 'Arabl’s corpus. 

This study examines three major aspects of the prayer. Chapter 
1 explores its contemporary life, providing an indication of its cir- 
culation and use through examples from different arenas. Chapter 2 
focuses on historical dimensions based on manuscript copies span- 
ning the last four centuries, exploring facets of the presentation and 
transmission of the prayer. Chapter 3 examines perceptions of the 
prayer’s properties and recommendations concerning its use. The 
discussion touches on aspects of its composition and the interplay 
within it between invocations of Divine Names, specific supplications 
and Qur’anic quotations. This chapter also provides a translation of 
the prayer, an Arabic text resulting from a considered evaluation of 
copies reviewed, and a transliteration. Finally, an Appendix sets out 
details of manuscript copies and chains of transmission discussed. 


2 


Notes to Introduction 


Notes 


1. Two exceptions can be mentioned, (a) Ryad Atlagh, ‘L’Oraison de personne, 
donation et noms divins chez Ibn 'Arab! (A propos de Da'wat asma’ Allah al-husna 
attribute a Ibn 'Arab!)’, Bulletin d’Etudes Orientates LI (1999), pp. 41-107 provides a 
critical edition and discussion of the prayer mentioned in the title, with a lengthy 
treatment of Ibn 'Arabl’s position concerning prayer in general, and the place of the 
Divine Names in this, (b) Ibn 'Arab!, The Seven Days of the Heart: Prayers for the Days 
and Nights of the Week (Awrad al-usbu), tr. Pablo Beneito and Stephen Hirtenstein 
(Oxford, 2000) provides a detailed discussion of the daily/nightly prayers for the 
week and a translation based on a critical edition still to be published. Throughout 
the present study, these daily/nightly prayers for the week attributed to Ibn 'Arabl are 
referred to as Awrad. 

2. See Ahmed Ziya’iiddin Gumii§hanevi, Majmuat al-ahzab (Istanbul, n.d.), 3 
volumes: 1, pp.2-83. 

3. For example, Majmu salawdt via awrad sTdT MuhyT al-DTn Ibn Arab T radiya Al- 
lahu ‘ anhu , compiled by Muhammad Ibrahim Muhammad Salim (n.p., 2000) encom- 
passes a group of salawdt (prayers upon the Prophet) and the Awrad. Salim is author 
of Ta’yJd al-suftya fiTtnajtnu' a al-Hatimlya, where he also presents some of these 
prayers. 

4. On the term hizb (pi. ahzdb), which has come to be applied to any single group 
of supererogatory liturgical formulae, and its relation to wird (with which it is often 
interchangeable: for example I {see Appendix), fol. 62b refers to al-wird al-musammd 
bi’l-dawr al-a' la [The wird called...’]; in Genel 43, fol. 29b, the text of the prayer is 
headed thus: hbdhihi al-awrad al-musammd bi’l-dawr al-a' Id [‘These are the awrad that 
are called...’]), see Constance E. Padwick , Muslim Devotions: A Study of Prayer-Manu- 
als in Common Use (Oxford, 1996/1961), pp. 20-25; ‘Hizb’, El 2 , 3, pp. 5 13—5 14; ‘Wird’, 
El 2 , 11, pp. 209-210. On these and other terms commonly applied to liturgical texts 
(such as dud’ and hirz), see also Richard J. A. McGregor, ‘A Sufi Legacy in Tunis: 
Prayer and the Shadhiliyya’, IJMES 29 (1997), pp. 263-267; ‘Du'a”, El 2 , 2, pp.617- 
618; below. 

The term dawr (pi. adwaf, signifying a turn or revolution, does not appear to be 
as widely used as hizb /wird: indeed, no other case of its use is known to the present 
author. In our sources the term dawr is applied both to our prayer as a whole, and to 
its individual verses. Thus some copies (e.g. K) describe each of the prayer’s individ- 
ual verses as a dawr, marking them in order as al-dawr al-awwal, al-dawr al-thdm, etc. 
D, pp.6-7 elaborates on the significance of the term in the prayer’s name thus: ‘This 
prayer has been called al-Dawr al-a' Id because... it turns upon ( yaduru 'ala) the Name 
of God the Ever-Exalted, from Whom all things begin and to Whom is their end... 
and because its secrets circulate with ( taduru ma'a ) the one who reads it day and night, 
in secret and in public, awake and asleep, in good health and sickness, in hard times 


3 


Introduction 


and good, in this life, the hereafter and the barzakh...[ It is] “the most elevated” dawr 
because of the abundant help and secrets it contains. . .’ The attempt by McGregor, ‘A 
Sufi Legacy in Tunis’, p. 266 to apply to the prayer an understanding of the term dawr 
derived from usage in the context of religious celebrations in contemporary Egypt, 
where it denotes a vocal piece drawn from colloquial poetry and involving a choral 
refrain, is unsustainable. Finally, it is notable that Yazma Bagijlar 2934, fol. 39b, de- 
scribes the prayer as Hizb al-dawr al-a’ Id. 

On the relative scholarly neglect of sufi prayer texts and recitation, see for example 
McGregor, A Sufi Legacy in Tunis’, p. 255. It is remarkable that no follow-up study 
to Padwick’s classic work has yet been attempted. 

5. Mahmud Mahmud al-Ghurab, al-Tartq ild Allah: al-shaykh wa'l-murld min 
kaldm al-Shaykh al-Akbar (Damascus, 1991), p. 194 n. 1. 


4 


1 


The Dawr Today 

Contemporary contexts 

Like all liturgical texts originating with sufi figures, the Dawr al- 
a' la effectively has a double life in the modern world. One of these, 
a continuation of its traditional past, is hidden, mediated through 
spiritual authority to permit its use exercised by the sufi shaykh to 
his disciple {murid) typically in the context of a sufi order or tarlqa 
affiliation, and symbolised by the granting of a special authorisation 
(ijdza). T he other is visible, open and public, a destiny arising out of 
the shattering of traditional systems and modes in the acquisition 
and transmission of religious knowledge in Muslim societies, and 
driven by the impacts of print and other modern information tech- 
nologies alongside mass literacy. 1 The following examples illustrate 
this double life, and at the same time convey something of the diver- 
sity of contemporary users of the prayer. In general terms, while it 
appears in some of the many collections of prayers readily available 
across the Muslim world today, the Dawr is not as well known as 
other, comparable, prayers. 2 

Damascus 

The prayer is recited collectively during certain of the open weekly 
gatherings devoted to calling down prayers and blessings upon the 
Prophet {rnajalis al-saldt 'aid al-nabt) held at the mosque adjacent to 
Ibn 'Arabl’s mausoleum in the Shaykh Muhyi’l-Din neighbourhood, 
the Salihiyya district, Damascus. During 2003, for example, it was 
read collectively at two of the eight majdlis scheduled each week. One 


5 


The Dawr Today 


was established quite recently and is held between noon ( zuhr ) and 
afternoon (jasr) prayers on Friday: 4 the other, which takes place be- 
fore dawn (fajr) prayers on Saturday, is long-standing. 5 The text of 
the prayer is available in the form of a photocopied sheet stored in 
the imams’ room in the mosque, from where it is occasionally dis- 
tributed. It also appears for distribution from time to time in the 
form of a small pamphlet, often printed together with a hadith or 
Qur’anic verses. 6 In addition, some of the larger pamphlets printed 
specifically for use in various majdlis (and effectively the property of 
those majdlis) encompass the prayer. Reaching a wider circulation, it 
appears in a popular collection of prayers compiled by former Mufti 
of Syria Muhammad Abu’l-Yusr 'Abidin (d. 1981) and published by 
his heirs, 8 and in a more recent collection distributed free, published 
as a joint venture between Turkish and Syrian publishers. 9 It can 
also be found on the margin of editions of al-Jazull’s popular Sunni 
prayer manual Dala il al-khayrdt that circulate in Damascus. 10 Fi- 
nally, it is presented in one of the many privately published works of 
an Egyptian sufi shaykh and interpreter-disseminator of Ibn 'Arabl’s 
thought long settled in Damascus, Mahmud al-Ghurab. 11 

The prayer is thus easily accessible to people of all backgrounds 
in Damascus. At the same time, in some circles there traditional 
sufi modes of transmission continue. The ijdza in this context is un- 
derstood to unlock the prayer’s secrets for the murid in a way that 
protects him from potential harm: it also ensures that these secrets 
remain the preserve of those suitably prepared to receive them. The 
ijdza often encompasses an instruction concerning the time and fre- 
quency of recitation. It may require the murid to situate the prayer, 
whenever they recite it, within a cluster of other prayers and for- 
mulae, or involve making precise additions at certain points in the 
text. Specific to each murid, such prescriptions are not arbitrary, and 
may indeed have been received by the shaykh in a dream or vision. 
Tailored to the murid’ s level, they may be changed as he advances on 
the spiritual journey. 

The vitality of this mode of transmission can be illustrated 
through the practice of Ahmad al-FIarun (d.1962), widely recognised 


6 


Damascus 


in Damascene sufi circles as an important saint, and his prominent 
disciples . 12 For example, al-Harun granted an ijaza to his disciple 
Mahmud al-Ghurab to read the prayer once every thirty-six hours 
(this ijaza also encompassed the Awrad, Ibn 'Arabl’s daily prayers ). 13 
Fie gave an ijaza to his disciple Mamduh al-Nass to read it once 
every twenty- four hours (again, in addition to the Awrad). Al-Nass 
in turn gave his son Muhammad Samir an ijaza to read the prayer 
daily, this time preceded by al-NawawI’s Ijizb and followed by reci- 
tation of surat al-Fatiha for the souls of the Prophet, Ibn 'Arab! and 
al-Harun . 14 

Such instructions for reading the prayer sometimes migrate out 
of the sphere of esoteric transmission to accompany printed cop- 
ies, thereby becoming available for general application. For example, 
'Abidin prefaces the prayer with a note explaining that his grand- 
father had received a direct instruction from Ibn 'Arabl (through a 
karama or act of spiritual grace granted the two of them) to read it 
twice daily, once following the morning ( subh ) prayer and again after 
the sunset one ( maghrib ). In the case of a specific matter of impor- 
tance, Ibn 'Arab! had instructed him to read it three times following 
the afternoon prayer . 15 'Abidin also provides detailed instructions 
concerning what must be recited before and after the prayer . 16 

From the ulama to the illiterate, conviction of the prayer’s potency 
is widespread in Damascene sufi circles and among Ibn 'Arabl’s local 
devotees, who attach themselves to his mosque. 1 ' One such devotee 
attributes this potency to the fact that the prayer encompasses many 
Divine Names, another to its special quality as the summation of all 
of Ibn 'Arabl’s teachings, indeed ‘the essence of his entire knowledge.’ 
Devotees believe that if the prayer is recited with right intention, 
absolute certainty of its power and the aim of pleasing God while 
repudiating the pull of this world, it can draw the reciter into the 
Prophet’s presence ( al-hadra al-Muhammadiya)\ the Prophet then 
appears to them ‘through Ibn 'Arab!’, especially in dreams. Drawing 
on their personal experiences, some point out that whoever reads the 
prayer with sincerity of heart and utter conviction while making a 
specific plea will have their wish granted. They relate how they read 


7 


The Dawr Today 


it with the intention of seeking help in relation to concrete prob- 
lems, and are always confident of a positive response. For example, 
one devotee tells how when he recites the prayer with this specific 
request in mind, Ibn 'Arabl appears to him in dreams and shows him 
how to solve practical problems at work that require technical know- 
ledge in which he has no training. Whenever he is guided to solve 
a work problem in this way, he refuses payment for the job, for he 
attributes his success in it to Ibn 'Arabl’s haraka or blessing, through 
the prayer, rather than his own effort. He relates with gratitude how 
he has developed a new career and improved his family’s material 
circumstances through the help granted him in response to requests 
mediated through the prayer. 


Istanbul 

The earliest printed versions of the prayer appeared in Istanbul dur- 
ing the late 19 th century, in Gum lishanevi’s Majmu'at al-ahzdb 18 
and the Data’ il al-khayratj 9 for example. The first modern Turkish 
transliteration of the prayer was published in 1998 by a publishing 
company owned by a devotee of Ibn 'Arabl. This small booklet also 
provides the Arabic text and a clarification of the prayer’s meanings 
in Turkish. 20 By 2004, more than thirty thousand copies had been 
printed, distributed free throughout Turkey in response to internet 
requests, via bookshops, in mail-shots, etc. It is reprinted every few 
months to meet demand, and people of all kinds order and read it, 
including many who are outwardly ‘cok-modern’. 

While the prayer thus circulates openly in print, it is also still 
transmitted through ijdza granting in ‘hidden’ sufi circles in Istanbul. 
For example the Naqshbandi Shaykh Ahmed Yivlik (d.2001) granted 
ijdzas to read the prayer to certain of his own disciples and to other 
sufis in Istanbul. 21 For some his instruction was to read it twice a 
day, in certain cases following th eAwrdd; for others, on its own. His 
own ijdza to read the prayer is connected to a line of Naqshbandi 
shaykhs. 22 


8 


The United Kingdom 


The United Kingdom 

During the late 1960s, a copy of the prayer was brought to London 
by Bulent Rauf (d. 1987), a western-educated descendant of the Ot- 
toman elite. Rauf was the great-grandson of Ismail Pasha (d. 1895), 
khedive of Egypt from 1863 to 1879. 23 Ismail’s daughter, Rauf’s ma- 
ternal grandmother, was Princess Fatma Hanim (b. 1850), who died 
some time after the end of World War I. 24 Fatma Hanim had com- 
missioned a copy of the prayer to be made for her by the ‘Head Cal- 
ligrapher’, apparently in AH 1341/1922-23 CE: it was bound in red 
leather and embellished with gold. After she died, it came into her 
grandson’s possession. 

Rauf became the pivotal figure in a new religious movement that 
emerged under the name ‘Beshara’ in the south of England during 
the early 1970s. In response to the requests of young countercul- 
ture seekers interested in the spirituality of ‘the east’, he conveyed 
the teaching of Ibn 'Arabl as the basis of a monistic, experiential 
and supra-religious spirituality. He designed courses in ‘esoteric 
education’ aiming at self-knowledge, which were eventually offered 
in dedicated schools established by the movement. 25 Some of the 
early students noticed Fatma Hanim’s beautiful copy of the Dawr 
in Rauf’s possession, and his printed copy of the Awrdd. They en- 
quired whether these prayers could be made available in translit- 
eration. Rauf agreed and assigned two students to the task, one of 
whom could read Arabic. This student rendered the text into Heb- 
rew transliteration (his native tongue), and from that into English 
transliteration (they had no knowledge of a transliteration system 
for Arabic). Rauf corrected and completed the text with diacritical 
marks, and it was distributed to all involved in Beshara. Lie did not 
give guidelines for its recitation, but emphasised its protective ef- 
fect. This text was published in 1981 alongside the original by the 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society (MIAS), which had been established 
during the mid-1970s by some of those involved in Beshara. 26 The 
inclusion of the phonetic English transliteration is specifically aimed 


9 


The Dawr Today 


at the non-Arabic-speaking Beshara constituency (which today has 
international extent) and others unable to read the Arabic original, 
making it possible for them to recite the text. 2 ' The MIAS web- 
site suggests how the prayer can be used for the purposes of pro- 
tection: ‘this prayer. . .protects its recipient. In microfiche form, it is 
frequently carried as an amulet or displayed in a significant place .’ 28 
Many involved in Beshara wear the microfiche form in a silver en- 
casement on a neck-chain: they also position it above the inside of a 
main door at home. Sometimes a framed photocopy of the first page 
of the prayer is displayed. Some read the prayer regularly, while oth- 
ers resort to it in times of difficulty or to ward off perceived evil. 


io 


Notes to Chapter 1 


Notes 


1. The modern period has witnessed the widening accessibility of sufi resources 
beyond the initiated and prepared, a trend that has accelerated since the late 20 th cen- 
tury. See for example Elizabeth Sirriyeh, Sufi Thought and its Reconstruction, in 
Suha Taji-Farouki and Basheer M. Nafi, eds., Islamic Thought in the Twentieth Century 
(London, 2004), pp. 123-124; Garbi Schmidt, Sufi Charisma on the Internet, in 
David Westerlund, ed., Sufism in Europe and North America (London, 2004), pp. 109— 
126. 

On the general impacts of print (and later mass education, literacy and new media) 
on traditional notions of religious authority and on systems for learning and trans- 
mitting religious knowledge, see for example Francis Robinson, ‘Technology and 
Religious Change: Islam and the Impact of Print’, Modern Asian Studies 27: 1 (1993), 
pp. 229-251; Dale F. Eickelman, The Art of Memory: Islamic Education and its 
Social Reproduction, in Juan I. Cole, ed., Comparing Muslim Societies: Knowledge and 
the State in a World Civilization (Ann Arbor, MI, 1992), pp. 97-132; idem, Islamic 
Religious Commentary and Lesson Circles: Is there a Copernican Revolution?, in 
G. W. Most, ed., Commentaries {Kommentar} (Gottingen, 1999), pp. 121-146. 

While our interest here is in the contemporary situation, it should be noted that 
very few of the liturgical texts associated with the tarTqas remained confined to their 
membership even in pre-modern times. 

2. Padwick’s survey of ‘popular’ prayer manuals gathered from cities across the 
Muslim world during the 1950s encompasses the Dawr, but she does not consider it 
among their best-known contents. In addition to the examples below, it appears in the 
popular prayer collection Manba' al-sa'adat, p. 255, published in Beirut: see McGregor, 
‘A Sufi Legacy in Tunis’, p.275 n.63. Our examples do not encompass the world of 
Shi'i Islam, but we would point out that the prayer appears to be less widely known 
and used there than in Sunni contexts. 

3. On the salawdt or tasliya , the practice of calling down prayers and blessings 
upon the Prophet, see Annemarie Schimmel, And Muhammad is His Messenger: The 
Veneration of the Prophet in Islamic Piety (Chapel Hill, NC, 1985), pp.92 ff; Padwick, 
Muslim Devotions, pp. 152 ff. 

4. Held at a time when families gather at home for lunch after the Friday prayer, 
attendance at this majlis (established in 2001) is not substantial. During February 
2003, the majlis was led by Muhammad Amin 'Ashur, a disciple of the revered Shadhili 
Ahmad al-Habbal al-Rifa'l. Beginning immediately after the end of the khatTb’s les- 
son, it opened with the calling down of peace and blessings upon the Prophet. A 
pamphlet was distributed: Salawdt ' ala al-nabJ al-karim sayyidina rasul Allah li’l-shaykh 
Ahmad al-DardayrT al-KhalwatT. 'Ashur called for recitation of surat al-Fatiha for the 
soul of Ibn 'Arabl, and the assembly proceeded to recite the Dawr, printed in the 
pamphlet’s last few pages, at considerable speed. On completing this, the majlis re- 


II 


The Dawr Today 


cited surat al-Fatiha, a salatvdt by Ahmad al-Dardayri al-Khalwatl, al-Fatiha again, 
and Manzumat asmd ’ Allah al-husna al-Dardayriya. A substantial amount of text was 
completed in forty minutes. 'Ashur recited al-Fatiha and asked those present to recite 
it for the benefit of certain individuals in need. Fie then led the majlis in reading surat 
Ya Sin. Thereafter, the tahlil (la ildha ilia Allah ) was repeated. Two majlis ‘servants’ 
arrived with large bags of bread, which they began to distribute, marking the end 
of the majlis. 'Ashur continued to call down peace and blessings upon the Prophet 
followed by spontaneous supplication, in which he asked God to grant victory to the 
Muslims over those who aggress against them, to heal the sick, to forgive those who 
have transgressed, and to have mercy upon the dead. The congregation affirmed 
his emotional prayers with ‘ dmm ’ at each pause. Reflecting the concerns of the hour, 
he asked God to destroy enemy planes, to grant victory to the Palestinians, and to 
protect Syria, using al-Fatiha as an adjuration throughout. Fie asked God to accept 
the majlis through the standing of the prophets, their wives and mothers, and the 
companions and saints, ‘especially those at whose doorsteps we sit - Shaykh Muhyl 
al-Din, and Shaykh al-NabulusI - through their haraka and kardmdt, achieved through 
Allah Flimself.’ Fie asked God to compensate anyone who had spent towards the 
■majlis and requested donations for an unnamed person in difficult circumstances. 

5. According to one of the mosque imams, this majlis - set apart from all others 
by recitation of Mustafa al-Bakrl’s Wird al-sahar (known also as al-Fath al-qudsi 
viaTkashf dl-unst), was established over seventy years ago by the Rifa'i Hashim Abu 
Tawq (1847-1962). According to Muhammad Muti' al-FIafiz and Nizar Abaza, 
Ta'rJkh ' ulamd ’ Dimashq ft’l-qarn al-rdbi' ' ashar al-hijrT (Damascus, 1986), 2, p.769, 
Abu Tawq personally led recitation of Wird al-sahar at the mosque every Saturday 
before fajr for forty- five years. Some local sources hold that this majlis was instituted 
by Mustafa al-Bakrl himself together with 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI, and suggest 
that it has been held there continuously since. In 1960, Abu Tawq handed responsi- 
bility for the majlis to Salim al-'Amm, who had committed himself to the mosque 
in 1942. 

Al-'Amm opened a majlis during February 2003 with recitation of al-Fatiha, 
Qur’anic verses, supplication and the istighfdr (forgiveness) formula. A booklet was 
distributed: Majmu' al-awrad al-kabir: yashtam.il 'ala al-ma’thur 'an al-a’imma wa'l- 
aqtdb min al-salatvdt 'aid al-nabt wa’l-awrad wa’l-ad' iya wa’l-adhkdr ■wa'l-ahzdb wa’l- 
istighjardt. Al-'Amm led the majlis in reciting with great beauty Wird al-sahar, with its 
repetitions of Divine Names and lyrical flourishes. At a transitional point, the majlis 
‘servant’ distributed halva sandwiches. Al-'Amm launched into spontaneous, at times 
tearful, supplication. He called for peace upon the Prophet and his companions, 
ulama, muhaddithun, and all people of faith. Salams were addressed to the Prophet, 
referring to the fact that the majlis was taking place in his presence, and to Mustafa 
al-Bakrl. After further supplication, recitation of al-Fatiha and the calling down of 
blessings upon the prophet, he returned to the wird. Having completed it, he repeated 
the tahlil alone, then followed each time by an emphatic ‘Lord have mercy on me!’ or 
‘Lord forgive me!’ After further supplication, he led those gathered in reciting the 


12 


Notes to Chaper 1 

Daivr al-a' la at some speed. At its end, he emphasised to the majlis the importance of 
reading the Daivr frequently, at least once a day. With this the majlis ended, as the 
time for the dawn adhdn approached. 

6. For example, in 2003 it appeared in a small booklet: al-Dawr al-a' Id li-sidi 
sultan al-'arifin iva 'umdat al-mukdshiftn via zubdat al-wdsiltn via khdtimat al-aviliya’ 
al-muhaqqiqm, al-shaykh al-akbar mainland Muhyi al-Din ilm al-'Arabi, radiya Allah 
ta'dld 'anhu via arddhu. It is prefaced by a hadith that stresses the potency of certain 
Qur’anic formulae when repeated, and followed by a poem in praise of Ibn 'Arabl by 
local poet Ahmad al-Zarruq (d. 1955 : on him see Hafiz and Abaza, Ta’rikh 'ulama’ 
Ditnashq, 3, pp. 257-259), another hadith (underlining the importance of avoiding the 
prohibited), the end of the Thursday morning prayer from the Avirdd attributed to 
Ibn 'Arab! but without explicit identification of its origin, and finally a salavidt by 
Ahmad al-Badawi. 

7. For example, in the two pamphlets mentioned in notes 5-6 above, on pp. 185— 
193 of Majmu ' al-aivrdd al-kabir. The pamphlet Salavidt 'ala al-nabi al-karim sayyidind 
rasiil Allah li'l-shaykh Ahmad al-Dardayri al-Khalviati begins with an open permission 
to read the salavidt of al-Dardayrl (tracing back his Khalwati initiation to Mustafa 
al-Bakrl and then Muhammad b. Salim al-Hifnawl). The salavidt is followed by surat 
Ya Sin, the Daivr and additional salavidt. Pamphlets such as these two carry a state- 
ment that they are a viaqf of the majlis. 

8. Al-Avirad al-dd’ima ma'a al-salaviat al-qd’ ima, collected and arranged by 
Muhammad Abu’l-Yusr 'Abidin, ed. shaykh Bashir al-Bari, former Mufti of Damas- 
cus, 4 th edn. (Damascus, 1991), pp. 38-45. On 'Abidin, see Hafiz and Abaza, Ta’rikh 
'ulama’ Dimashq, 2, pp. 968-973. According to sources in Damascus who knew him, 
he advised people to read some of Ibn 'Arabl’ writings daily, suggesting specifically 
al-Futuhdt al-MakkTya. 

9. Avirdd usbu'iya li’l-shaykh al-'drif Muhyi al-Din Ibn Arabl (Istanbul and 
Damascus, n.d.), pp. 60-66, published by Kitsan (Istanbul) and Dar al-Bayruti 
(Damascus). On Kitsan and for further details concerning the genesis of this publica- 
tion, see below. 

10. For example, Abu 'Abdallah Muhammad b. Sulayman al-Jazuli, Dald’ il al- 
khayrdt via yalihi qasidat al-burda via qasidat al-tnunfarija [via bi-hdmishihi majmu at 
al-avirdd via’l-ahzdb via’l-ad' iya viaTistighdthdt], intro., Salah al-Din Abu’l-Jihad 
Nakahmayy (Aleppo, 1420), on the margin of pp. 241-251: it is among a collection of 
prayers independent of the Dald’ il, added to the text when it was first printed. 

11. Al-Ghurab, al-Tariq ild Allah, pp. 194-197. Although al-Ghurab suggests that 
this is a critical edition he does not indicate which or how many manuscripts he used 
and gives very few variants. (He also presents a critical edition of the Avirdd, for 
which he again provides little detail on the manuscript base used. See pp. 173-193.) 
Born in Tanta in 1922, al-Ghurab settled in Damascus during the 1950s: on him 
see further below. For a partial list of his publications, see Ahmad b. Muhammad 
Ghunaym, al-Arif bi’lldh al-shaykh Ahmad al-Hdrun: siratuhu via kardmdtuhu (Da- 
mascus, 1992), p.67 n. 1. 


13 


The Dawr Today 


12 . Born in al-Salihiyya, Damascus in 1900, al-Harun worked for many years as 
a stonemason. He acquired literacy skills late in life, and dedicated himself to study- 
ing and writing on the natural sciences and issues of faith. Widely circulating stories 
of his kardmdt centre on his ability to cure the sick. He reportedly had a very close 
relationship to Ibn 'Arabl (his writings include a commentary on K. Md layu'awwal 
'alayhi). Al-Hartin’s relationships with his own disciples had no particular tariqa 
framework. On hint see Ghunaym, al-'Arif bi’llah al-shaykh Ahmad al-Harun ; Hafiz 
and Abaza, Ta’rTkh 'ulatnd’ Dimashq, 2, pp. 753-762; 'Izzat Hasriya, al-shaykh Arslan 
al-DimashqT wafihi lamha 'an al-shaykh Ahmad al-Harun (n.p., 1965), pp. 163-180. 

13 . See al-Ghurab, al-Tarlq ild Allah, p. 194. Al-Ghurab first encountered al- 
Harun in 1955 and remained with hint until his death (interview with al-Ghurab, 
Damascus, 2003). For the details of their relationship and perceptions of al-Ghurab 
as al-Harun’s khalifa, see Suha Taji-Farouki, At the Resting-place of the Seal of Saints: 
Muhyt al-Din Ibn Aral)! and his Mausoleum-Mosque Complex in Contemporary Damascus 
(forthcoming). 

14 . Interview with Muhammad Samir al-Nass (Damascus, 2004): al-Nass is a 
US-trained medical doctor, presently imam in Nafidh Mosque and fiqh teacher at 
Ma'had al-Fath. A recognised expert in the readings and recitation of the Qur’an (he 
teaches recitation at the Shaykh Muhyi’l-Din Mosque), he is author of al-WasTla ild 
fahm haqTqat al-tawassul (Damascus, 2003) and Mafhum al-bid'a bayna al-dTq waTsa'a 
(Damascus, 2002). On him see http://www.as-shifa.org.uk/ulum/shaykhsamir.htm 
and http://www.ihyafoundation.com/index.php?page = scholars#samir. Note that al- 
Nawawl composed a daily wird and K. al-Adhkar al-yawmTya wa’l-laylTya. 

A separate example arises in the Shadhili Muhammad al-Hashiml al-Jaza’irl 
{al-Tilimsani} (d. 1961) granting an ijaza to read the prayer to the Rifa'i Muhammad 
al-Durra, who granted it to his son, Mahmud Muhammad al-Durra, presently imam 
at the al-Talha wa’l-Zubayr Mosque in 'Ayn Tarma on the outskirts of Damascus. 
Al-Durra has been active in publishing Rifa'i texts: for example, Mi'rdj al-wusul ild 
hadarat al-rida wa’l-qabfil bi-tawajjuhdt saddtina al-sada anjal al-marhum al-sayyid Taj 
al-DTn al-SayyadT (Damascus, 1418) (interview with al-Durra, Damascus, 2004). On 
al-Hashiml, see Hafiz and Abaza, Ta’rTkh 'ulama’ Dimashq, 2, pp. 747-751. 

15 . Al-Awrad al-dd’ima ma' a al-salawdt al-qd’ima, p. 38. 

16 . Ibid., pp. 38-39; 45. The supplicant must first recite al-Fatiha with the basmala 
four times, each with the same breath, then the first three verses of surat al-An'am, 
then a specific salawdt formula seven times, followed by a specific prologue to the 
Dawr. After completing the Dawr, he must recite surat al-Inshirah three times fol- 
lowed by another salawdt, completing by reciting al-Fatiha for the Prophet and Ibn 
'Arabl. Historical examples of such recommendations are detailed below. 

17 . This paragraph draws on interviews in Damascus in 2003-04. 

18 . Giimiijhanevi became attached to Abdiilhamid II’s court and served his re- 
gime and pan-Islamic policies. On him see Alexander Knysh, Islamic Mysticism: A 
Short History (Leiden, 2000), p.228; Butrus Abu-Manneh, Shaykh Ahmed Ziya’iiddin 
Gumiijhanevi and the Ziya’i-Khalidi Sub-order, in Frederick de Jong, ed., Shia Islam, 


14 


Notes to Chapter 1 

Sects and Sufism: Historical Dimensions , Religious Practice and Methodological Considera- 
tions (Utrecht, 1992), pp. 105-117. 

19. For example: Re§id Efendi 1135 (AH 1288), Diigumlii Baba 500 (AH 1285), 
Nafiz Pa§a 762 (AH 1285), Hayri Abdullah Efendi 230 (AH 1302). In the first three 
printings it is pp. 197-203, in the last one, pp. 193-199. In all cases, the text of the Hizb 
of al-NawawI is on the margin of the Dawr, and it is followed by al-qastda al-munfarija. 
In currency in Istanbul today is a facsimile reprint of Hayri Abdullah Efendi 230 as 
Deldil-i-Hayrat: Saldvat-i-fierifler (Istanbul, n.d.). Not all more recent editions of the 
Dald’ il printed in Istanbul incorporate the prayer. For example, it appears in Deldilii’l- 
Hayrat ve §evdrikii’l Envdr fi zikrfs-saldti ale’n-nebiyypl-muhtdr: Deldilul-Hayrat ve 
Terciimesi (Istanbul, n.d.), pp. 288-301, but not in DeldiViil Hayrdt ve §evarik’al Envdr 
(Istanbul, n.d.). Both are pocket versions. The version incorporating the prayer is 
published (by Yasin Yayinevi) and sold within the orthodox Naqshbandi neighbour- 
hood of Qar§amba in the Fatih district. 

20. §eyh’iil Ekber Muhyiddm Ibn'iil ArabJ (K. S.) Ozel Dua’si “Hizb-ud’Devr’ul 
A’ld”: Orjinali, Tiirk^e okunuyu ve Mdndsi (Istanbul, n.d.). The translator is Kemal 
Osmanbey, a Syrian of Turkish origin, his grandfather having been an official at the 
court of Sultan Abdiilaziz who was granted lands in Syria. Resident in Istanbul since 
1988, Osmanbey brought a copy of the prayer from the Shaykh Muhyi’l-Din Mosque 
for Remzi Goknar, owner of Kitsan publishers. They agreed that Osmanbey would 
translate it (possibly with the help of Goknar’s wife §ukran Goknar: see below) and 
Kitsan would publish it. Osmanbey is a medical doctor who currently practises acu- 
puncture. He is particularly interested in the spirit world: his publications include 
Ruh Aleminde bir Seyahat (Istanbul, 1995) and Haqd’iq 'an tanasukh al-arwdh wa’l- 
hassa al-sadisa (Beirut, 2002). Kitsan, established by Goknar in 1980, specialises in 
sufi books : its publications include a few Turkish translations of works attributed to 
Ibn 'Arabl such as Tuhfe’tus Sefiere and Mevaki’un Niiciim. On Kitsan, see http://www. 
kitsan.com. 

21. Yivlik, who worked as a civil servant, has been described by close disciples as 
‘a spiritual son and lover of Ibn 'Arabl’. According to one disciple, he read continu- 
ously from the Fusils al-hikam and al-Futiihdt al-Makkiya and made frequent visits to 
Ibn 'Arabl’s tomb in Damascus. While himself not a scholar, he has rendered at least 
one sufi work into modern Turkish: Selim Divane, Miftah-u mifikildt il-drifin dddb-u 
tarikVl-vdsilin , tr. from Ottoman by Ahmed Sadik Yivlik (Istanbul, 1998). Yivlik led 
a circle of about twenty disciples in Istanbul reading translations of Ibn 'Arabl’s 
works, including some non-Turks and illiterates. Goknar’s son and wife §ukran were 
among his close disciples, his wife having personally funded the joint Kitsan-Dar 
al-Bayruti publication Awrad usbu'Tya li’l-shaykh al-'drif Muhyi al-DTn Ibn 'ArabJ de- 
tailed above. One thousand copies were published, the majority distributed free in 
Damascus in 2004, the remainder in Istanbul. Dar al-Bayruti has planned a reprint, 
which Kitsan has stipulated must also be distributed free. The dedication in the 
booklet points to the relationship between §ukran Goknar, Yivlik and Ibn 'Arabl. 
She writes: ‘To Ahmed Sadiq Yivlik, who made known to me the Shaykh al-Akbar’s 


15 


The Dawr Today 


stature. May God sanctify his secret and cause him to live in His Spacious Gardens 
with the Shaykh al-Akbar.’ §ukran Goknar has herself published a few titles with 
Kitsan, including Riiya Tabirleri. She intends to facilitate production of a Turkish ver- 
sion of the Awrad. 

22. His shaykh 'Ali Bahjat Efendi received it front the latter’s shaykh Hayrullah 
Efendi, who received it front his shaykh Ali Bahjat Efendi Ekber. Thanks are due to 
Mahmud Kilif for this information. 

23. A controversial figure in Egyptian history seen either as an extravagant in- 
competent or a far-sighted if unlucky modernizer, Ismail eventually became unpopu- 
lar both at home and with the European powers, and was finally deposed by Sultan 
Abdiilhamid under European pressure. See M. E. Yapp, The Making of the Modern 
Near East, 1792-1923 (London and New York, 1987), pp. 155-157; 214-215; Albert 
Hourani , Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age 1798-1939 (Cambridge, 1989), passim. See 
also Family Tree of Mehnret Ali Bulent Rauf, in Bulent Rauf, The Last Sultans, ed. 
Meral Arint and Judy Kearns (Cheltenham, 1995). 

24. See The Child across Time, in Bulent Rauf, Addresses II (Roxburgh, Scotland, 
2001), p.90. She was the sister of Mehmet Tevfik Pasha, who succeeded his father 
Ismail as khedive, and of Ahmet Fuad I Pasha, who would become the first king of 
Egypt. 

Fatma Hanim appears to have had a special connection with the Celvetiyye, as- 
suming responsibility with her daughter for restoring the mausoleum-mosque com- 
plex of the Celveti saint and effectively the first shaykh of the tariqa Aziz Mahmud 
Hudayi (d. 162 8) in Uskiidar, Istanbul, after it was damaged in a thunderstorm in 
1910. On this complex see Raymond Lifchez, The Lodges of Istanbul, in Lifchez, ed., 
The Dervish Lodge: Architecture, Art and Sufism in Ottotnan Turkey (Berkeley, LA and 
London, 1992), pp. 113-117. On her pivotal role in the renovation (which took place 
some years after the damage was inflicted) and the gifts and donations she made, see 
H. Kamil Yilmaz, AzTz Mahmud Hiidayl: Hayati, Eserleri, TarTkati (Istanbul, 1999), 
p.262 and n.20; Kemaleddin §enocak, Kutbu ’l-driftn Seyyid Aziz Mahmud Hiidayl 
(K. S.) (Istanbul, 1970) p.30 n.2. 

25. For a comprehensive study of the movement and associated figures see Suha 
Taji-Farouki, Beshara and llm Arab!: A Movement of Sufi Spirituality in the Modern 
World (forthcoming). 

26. The Hizbu-l Wiqdyah ofMuhyiddin Ibn Arabi (MIAS, Oxford); reprinted 2003. 
The Awrad were published first in 1979 as Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi, Wird (MIAS, 
Oxford); reprinted 1988. 

27. See http://www.ibnarabisociety.org/Publications.html. 

28. Ibid. 


16 


2 


A PRAYER ACROSS TIME 

Historical dimensions 

Based on the manuscript collection in the Suleymaniye Library 
(Istanbul), which holds over forty distinct copies, it is possible to 
construct a picture of the transmission, presentation and use of the 
Dawr during the last four hundred years. 1 Around a half of these 
copies are explicitly dated, or can be dated approximately based on 
contextual information: the earliest dates from the late ll th /17 th cen- 
tury, the greatest number from the 13 th /19 th century. 2 The prayer 
appears in a variety of settings. For example there are seven com- 
mentaries, four in Arabic and three in Ottoman Turkish, the earliest 
probably from the late 12 th /18 th century. 3 Beautiful individual copies 
bound alone or with another short prayer and embellished with gold 
were most likely produced at the request of important figures (like 
that brought to London by Rauf). 4 The Dawr sometimes appears as 
the only prayer alongside several non-devotional works, of which 
some may also be attributed to Ibn 'Arab!. 5 It is found in compila- 
tions devoted exclusively to prayers and prayer-commentaries, in- 
cluding at times other prayers attributed to Ibn 'Arab!, 6 and other 
kinds of devotional text. 7 It appears also in collections of prayers 
and non-devotional tracts, the latter sometimes attributed to figures 
associated with the school of Ibn AnablT There are copies of the 
prayer in personal notebooks that hold an intimate record of an in- 
dividual’s favourite poetic verses, prayers, Qur’anic verses and frag- 
ments from the works of various Islamic authorities, in addition to 
spiritual reflections, supplications, talismans, numerological codes 
and short devotional texts. 9 

T he repeated copying of the prayer in diverse settings bears 


17 


A Prayer across Time 


witness to its circulation and use over the last four hundred years . 10 
Pointing to its constituency of readers during the closing years of 
Ottoman rule, the Suleymaniye copies have been drawn from col- 
lections gathered from tekkes and dergas associated with diverse 
tarlqas (such as §azeli and Dugtimlii Baba), madrasas attached to 
mosques, pashas’ collections and collections endowed by sultans. 
The earlier copies provide some indication of the prayer’s users four 
hundred years ago, but chains of transmission or authorities ( sanad , 
pi. asnad ) n attached to seven copies make it possible to trace the his- 
tory of its use and transmission beyond the date of our earliest copy 
to the time of its author. These chains illuminate two aspects in 
the prayer’s transmission. Vertically, they identify key figures in its 
passage from generation to generation, while suggesting that it has 
indeed been in continuous use in every generation since its author’s 
day. Horizontally, the chains elucidate the circles within which the 
prayer was disseminated, pointing to their geographical loci, tariqa 
affiliations and intellectual orientations and identifying figures who 
served as a nexus between different circles within the larger net- 
work. We give below biographical information concerning figures 
in six chains , 12 arranged by century from the earliest to the most 
recent. The treatment does not aspire to be exhaustive, but focuses 
on significant historical figures . 13 The chains themselves are pre- 
sented as they appear in our sources in an Appendix. A diagram of 
these chains is also provided below, using readily identifiable names 
as elaborated in the biographical notes. After each name in these 
notes, the chain(s) in which the figures concerned appear are identi- 
fied by a capital letter, for ease of location in terms of sources (as set 
out in the Appendix), and in the diagram (overleaf). 

Any discussion of such chains must pay due attention to the cul- 
tural and social setting from which they emanate, with its associated 
practices and priorities. With this in mind, they can be investigated 
in terms of the plausibility of their individual links, encompassing 
chronology and the circumstances of the ijdza implicit within and 
underpinning each link . 14 We attempt such an investigation below. 
Finally, we consider how the picture that emerges from these chains 


18 


Historical dimensions 


can illuminate important trends and tendencies in Islamic culture 
and thought during specific historical periods. 


19 


Ibn 'Arabi 


E 

< 


-g 


-g 

oo 


-g 

On 


-g 

O 




Chains of Transmission of al-Dawr al-a' la 


A Prayer across Time 


Transmitters of the prayer 

7 th century AH 

Sa' d al-Dln Muhammad b. Muhyl al-Dln Ibn 'Arab! 

{E} [d.656/1258] 

The second son of Ibn 'Arab!; born in Malatya in AH 618. He left 
an important diwan. A student of hadith, he visited Cairo and lived 
in Aleppo. 15 

Radi al-Dln Ibrahim b. M b. Ibrahim b. Abu Bakr b. M 
al-Tabari al-Makkl {D} [d.722/1322] 

Also known as al-Radl al-Tabari and Radi al-Dln Abu Ishaq, 
a Shafi'i born in AH 636 who held the position of imam at the 
Maqam Ibrahim (‘Station of Abraham’) in Mecca. 16 Son of a shari- 
fian (Husayni) family respected far and wide for its learning and 
one of the oldest of the established families in Mecca (Radi al-Dln’s 
ancestor settled there c.570), well-connected and with top-ranking 
positions of qddl (judge), imam, mufti, khatlb (preacher) and teacher 
passing from generation to generation. Writing in the 17 th century, 
the biographer al-Muhibbl reported that from 673/1274 the family 
had held the imamate of the Maqam Ibrahim exclusively and contin- 
uously. 17 Radi al-Din studied under prominent figures and became 
learned in the Shafi'i madhhab (school of law). He was outstanding 
in piety, humbleness and charitableness, and never left the Hijaz. 18 
The many examples listed by the biographer Ibn al-' Iraqi suggest 
that he was a significant figure in transmitting works to his contem- 
poraries, including many visitors to Mecca. 19 

Abu Muhammad al-Qasim b. Muzaffar b. Mahmud b. Taj al- 
Umana’ Ahmad Ibn 'Asakir {A} 

A member of the Banu 'Asakir clan, which held an important position 
in Damascus during AH 470-660 and produced a dynasty of Shafi'i 


22 


Transmitters of the prayer 


scholars. 20 He appears under the full name given here as having re- 
ceived an ijaza from Ibn 'Arabl for the latter’s K. aTMu'ashsharat 
al-maymuna . 21 According to Yahya, he also appears in a chain at- 
tached to al-Futuhat al-Makkiya (where his name is given as Abu 
Muhammad al-Qasim b. al-Muzaffar b. Muhammad al-Tablb), for 
which he also received an ijaza directly from the author. 22 In a col- 
lection in his hand of works by Ibn 'Arab! and Sadr al-Dln Qunawl, 
al-Qasim refers to the latter in terms suggesting he may have been 
among Qunawl’s disciples. 23 Among those to whom he gave ijazas is 
Burhan al-Dln al-Tanukhl . 24 


8 th century AH 

Sharaf al-Dln 'Abd al-Mu’min b. Khalaf al-Dimyatl 

{E} [d.705/1306] 

Born in AH 613, an Egyptian hadith scholar and one of the most 
important figures in hadith transmission of the last third of the 7 th 
century AEI. Ele is best known for his mu' jam shuyukh or diction- 
ary of authorities. This gives the names of his shaykhs and those he 
met and from whom he received works in many fields, providing a 
record of hadith and other texts collected during numerous travels in 
Egypt, the Ilijaz, Iraq and Syria. 2 ’ His first visit to Syria was in 645. 
Ele returned to the north of the country on either side of a visit to 
Baghdad in 650, and between late 654 and late 656 he stayed several 
times (or possibly settled continuously) in Damascus. 26 The mu jam 
includes Muhammad b. Muhammad b. 'All Ibn al- 'Arabl Sa'd 
al-Dln al-Ta’l al-Dimashql . 27 

al-Nur/Nur al-Dln Abu’l-Hasan 'All b. 'Umar b. Abu Bakr 
al-Wanl [al-Khilatl al-Sufl] {F} [d.727/1327] 

Born in c.635 or 637 and known as Ibn al-Salah, he settled in Egypt. 
Two chains attached to al-Futuhat al-Makklya give him transmit- 
ting from Ibn 'Arabl and to Isma'll al-Jabartl . 28 The silsila (chain 
of transmission) of the khirqa akbarlya (akbarian mantle) as given 


23 


A Prayer across Time 


by Muhammad Murtada al-Zabldl also passes from Ibn 'Arabl to 
him and from him to Isma'll al-Jabartl. 2 ’ He appears in the maajim 
shuyukh of certain of his contemporaries. 30 He took works from vari- 
ous well-known authorities and was celebrated for his teaching and 
transmission of hadith, in which he connected young to old during 
his long life (he died aged 92). 31 

Nasir al-Dln Muhammad b. 'All b. Yusuf b. Idris al Kurdl 

al-HarawI 32 {E} [d.781/1379] 

Born in Dimyat, his date of birth is given as AH 696/7 (or 687 or 
701). 33 Through the agency of his maternal uncle 'Imad al-Dln al- 
Dimyatl, he audited works from Sharaf al-Dln 'Abd al-Mu’min 
b. Khalaf al-Dimyatl (who died when Nasir al-Dln was eight years 
old). 34 He also received ijazas from other shaykhs in Cairo. He trans- 
mitted to hadith scholars, linked young to old through his long life, 
and became unrivalled in this field. People sought him out to audit 
works and acquire sama s (certificates of audition) from him (the 
biographer Ibn al-' Iraqi reports that he studied under him many 
works received from al-Dimyatl through ijazas). He was a soldier 
who served as one of the sultan’s axe-bearers (and was thus known 
as al-Tabardar). He was well known for his piety, probity and love of 
the good. He transmitted to Muhammad b. Muqbil al-Halabl . 35 


9 th century AH 

Burhan al-Dln Abu Ishaq Ibrahim b. Ahmad b. 'Abd al-Wahid 
b. Sa'ld al-Tanukhl al-Ba'll 36 {A} [d. 800/1398] 

Known as al-Burhan al-Shaml, he was born in Damascus in AH 
709 and grew up there, but later settled in Cairo (his family origi- 
nated from Ba'l [Ba'albek]). He received ijazas from over three 
hundred (by some accounts nearly four hundred) authorities, in- 
cluding al-Qasim Ibn 'Asakir. He studied hadith, fiqh or jurispru- 
dence (in Hama, Aleppo and Cairo as well as other locations) and 
Qur’an readings/recitation, and was authorised to teach and issue 


24 


Transmitters of the prayer 


legal opinions. A highly respected scholar, he became ‘shaykh of 
Egypt’ both in hadith transmission and Qur’an readings. Among 
the many who studied under and transmitted works from him was 
Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl, who reports that he spent a long time in 
close companionship with him (and experienced ‘the baraka of his 
supplication’). Ibn Hajar detailed hadiths narrated by those listed in 
al-Tanukhl’s mu’ jam, and developed certain of al-Tanukhl’s works 
on hadith. ’ The historian and biographer Shams al-Dln al-Dhahabl 
(d.748/1352) also studied under al-Tanukhi and transmitted hadith 
from him. When al-Tanukhi lost his sight, he became known as al- 
Burhan al-Shaml ‘the Blind’. 38 

Isma'll al-Jabartl al-Zabldi {F} [d.806/1404] 

Charismatic sufi shaykh and ardent follower of Ibn 'Arabl. Together 
with his disciple Abd al-Karlm al-Jill (d.832/1429), he dissemi- 
nated the works of Ibn 'Arab! in Zabid, giving rise to a sufi move- 
ment in Rasulid Yemen committed to his teachings and those of his 
school. 39 

al-Jamal/Jamal al-Dln [Abu’l-Mahasin] Muhammad b. Ibrahim 
[b. Ahmad b. Abu Bakr] al-Murshidl [al-Makkl] {D} 

Meccan hadith scholar who transmitted works in hadith to 'Umar 
Ibn Fahd al-Makkl . 40 

Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl {A} [d. 852/1448] 

Prominent Egyptian hadith scholar (author of Fath al-bari, the great 
commentary on the Sahth ), biographer and Shall ' i mufti; often re- 
garded as the greatest 'alim (scholar) of his generation, he held the 
position of Chief Judge of Egypt and Syria for a total of twenty-one 
years. 41 As noted above, he transmitted from al-Tanukhi. In evalu- 
ating his attitude towards Ibn 'Arabl Knysh describes him as an ad- 
versary and critic, 42 but suggests at the same time that, in spite of 
some biographers’ attempts to depict him as an implacable enemy, 
Ibn Hajar presented the widest possible spectrum of opinions on Ibn 
'Arabl and avoided any clear-cut judgement of heresy or unbelief. 


25 


A Prayer across Time 


On this basis, he concludes that his position can be described as ‘ag- 
nostic’. 43 Ibn Hajar’s writings were for some time to come perhaps 
the last to present a favourable view of Ibn Taymlya outside of strict 
Hanbali circles (by the mid-14 th century the salafi view of Islam as 
articulated by Ibn Taymlya was largely eclipsed by the Ash'ari-sufi 
ulama establishment, which dominated the Sunni cultural milieu). 44 

Muhammad Abu’l-Fath b. Abu Bakr [Zayn al-Din/al-Zayn] 
al-Maraghl [Sharaf al-Dln al-Qurashl al-Makkl] {F} [d. 859/1455] 
Known as al-Maraghl al-saghlr (‘the younger’), born in Medina in 
AH 775, he was a faqih (jurist) and hadith scholar who left a num- 
ber of works and appears in many chains of transmission. According 
to one of them, he transmitted Ibn Arabi’s works and all that he 
transmitted to Zakarlya al-Ansarl. He transmitted his fihris (biblio- 
graphy) to 'Umar b. TaqI al-Dln Ibn Fahd . 4 He died in Mecca and 
has been described as a saint. 46 

Muhammad b. Muqbil al-Halabl al-Slrafi {E} [d. 870/1466] 

A highly important hadith transmitter (described as musnid al- 
dunydfi ' asrihi , ‘the most important hadith transmitter on earth in 
his time’), as the last remaining person to have transmitted from 
al-Fakhr Ibn al-Bukharl’s last living companion (al-Salah M b. 
Ibrahim b. Abu 'Umar al-Maqdisi al-Salihl al-Hanbali), and thus 
from al-Fakhr himself through a single intermediary. 4 ' Those who 
transmitted hadith from Muhammad b. Muqbil during his long life 
participated in the honour associated with his ‘high’ chain of au- 
thorities, flowing from his status as last link with a revered, bygone 
generation. They included Muhammad b.'Abd al-Rahman al-Sa- 
khawl 48 and Jalal al-Dln al-Suyutl, to whom Muhammad b. Muq- 
bil sent a written ijdza (from Aleppo to Egypt) in AH 869. 49 

Siraj al-Dln/al-Siraj 'Umar [Najm al-Dln] b. Muhammad [TaqI 
al-Dln] Ibn Fahd al-Makkl ]D] [d.885/1480] 

Known also as Abu’l-Qasim and Abu Hafs, a sharifian (al-Hashiml 
al-'AlawI) and a Shaft' i, he was born c.812. Flis grandfather had 


26 


Transmitters of the prayer 


taken his father Taqi al-Dln (b.787 in Egypt) to settle in Mecca, 
where he audited works and received ijazas from many shaykhs, and 
became a well-respected authority and prolific author. 50 The family 
produced a number of important transmitters, including 'Umar. 51 
'Umar detailed hadiths narrated by those listed in the mu' jam of 
Abu’l-Fath Muhammad al-Maraghl, among others. 52 Ele transmit- 
ted to Zakarlya al-Ansarl and al-Suyutl, among others. 53 Ele left a 
number of bibliographies and lists of teachers ( 'mashyakha ) pertain- 
ing both to himself and to others, and various works, including im- 
portant historical works focusing on Mecca: Ithdf al-ivard bi-akhbdr 
Umm al-Qurd; al-Tayslr bi-tarajim al-Tabarlyltr, al-Durr al-kamin bi- 
dhayl al-'Iqd al-thamm (ft ta’rlkh al-balad al-amtn ). 54 


10th century AH 
Jalal al-Dln al-Suyutl {E} [d.91 1/1505] 

Great Egyptian polymath, prolific author and ‘orthodox’ (Shadhili) 
sufi who spearheaded an apology for sufism and its leading figures. 
This encompassed a defence of the orthodoxy of Ibn 'Arabl in, for 
example, Tanblh al-ghabl bi-tabrVat Ibn 'Arab!, written as a refutation 
of al-Biqa'I’s Tanblh al-ghabl bi-takfir Ibn al-Fdrid wa Ibn ArablP 
Those from whom he transmitted included Muhammad b. Muqbil 
al-Halabl. 56 

['Izz al-Dln] 'Abd al-'AzIz b. 'Umar Ibn Fahd al-Makkl 

{D} [d.92 1-22/1 5 1 5-16] 

A Shafi'i known also as Abu’l-Khayr and Abu Faris, he was born in 
Mecca in AEI 850. He audited works from his father 'Umar Ibn Fahd 
al-Makkl and grandfather Taqi al-Dln. Ilis father acquired ijazas 
for him from various scholars including Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl, 57 
and took him to audit works from al-Maraghl among others. He 
then travelled widely through the Hijaz, Egypt, Syria and Pales- 
tine, gathering uncountable sama s and ijazas. He read works with 
Zakarlya al-Ansarl and spent time with al-SakhawT, among others. 


27 


A Prayer across Time 


He distinguished himself particularly in hadith scholarship in the 
Hijaz (he signed himself khadim al-hadith fiTharam al-Makki, ‘the 
servant of hadith in the Sacred Precinct of Mecca’). 58 His mu' jam 
shuyiikh encompasses a thousand shaykhs. 59 In addition to works on 
hadith, he produced Nuzhat dhaivl al-ahld?n bi-akhbdr al-khutaba 
wd’Ta’imma wa qnddt balad Allah al-hardm (‘The dreamer’s stroll 
through the stories of preachers, imams and judges of God’s sa- 
cred land’). The historian Muhammad Ibn Tulun was among those 
who transmitted from him, 60 while those to whom he transmitted 
included Yahya b. Makram b. Muhibb al-Dln {Abu’l-Ma'all} b. 
Ahmad al-Tabari . 61 

Zakarlya b. Muhammad al-Ansarl {F/A} [d.926/1520] 

Born in AH 823-24, a revered Egyptian sufi and Shafi'i authority. 
He studied, among others, under Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl , 62 and be- 
came associated with numerous turuq (pi. of tartqa). His renown in 
the exoteric sciences (especially fiqh-. he acted as Shafi'i grand qddi 
for twenty years and his commentaries on Shafi'i law became part 
of the madrasa curriculum) enabled him to protect his spiritual life 
from external scrutiny. He shared this dimension only with his clos- 
est pupils, such as 'Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha'ranl, who regarded him 
first and foremost as a saint and recorded his kardmdt . 6} His many 
works include some relating to tasawwuf (sufism), such as commen- 
taries on the writings of al-Qushayrl and Shaykh Arslan. 64 During 
the controversy caused in Cairo by the anti-monistic campaign of 
al-Biqa'l aimed at Ibn al-Farid and Ibn 'Arabl (874/1469), the sultan 
sought his expert opinion to put an end to the agitation caused by the 
affair: he defended them. 65 His many students included Badr al-Dln 
al-GhazzI , 66 who received ijdzas in all of Zakarlya al-Ansarl’s works 
when he studied under him during a visit to Cairo. 67 According to 
one chain, Zakarlya al-Ansarl transmitted the works of Ibn 'Arabl 
(and all that the latter transmitted) from Abu’l-Fath al-Maraghl . 68 


28 


Transmitters of the prayer 


'Abd al-Wahhab b. Ahmad al-Sha'ranl 69 {F} [d.973/1565] 

Egyptian scholar, Shall' i mufti, historian of sufism (through his 
tabaqdt or biographical compilations, among them the immensely 
popular al-Tabaqdt al-kubrd), sufi and apologist for sufis. He was a de- 
voted student and defender of the orthodoxy of Ibn 'Arab! (through, 
among others, the ‘deliberate interpolation’ hypothesis), 70 and popu- 
larised his teachings through the accessible and widely circulated al- 
Ya'wdqTt waTjawdhir, for example. The best known and most exalted 
of his teachers was Zakarlya al-Ansarl, who initiated him into the 
way in AH 914. 71 His sufism has been described as ‘orthodox, mid- 
dle-of-the-road’ (he identified with the orthodox way of al-Junayd 
and attacked the excesses of some tarlqas). 72 His stance as a sufi, 
faqih 73 and scholar of hadith was underpinned by reformist, even 
salafi, tendencies. 74 

'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus al-ShinnawI {F} 

Grandson of Muhammad al-ShinnawI (d.932), who was a popular 
leader and Ahmadl shaykh (after the popular saint Ahmad {al-Sayyid} 
al-BadawI [d.675/1276]) who spread his dhikr (practice of remem- 
brance of God) through the surrounding area from his zdiviya (sufi 
centre) in Mahallat Ruh west of Cairo, authorising the masses (and 
even women and children) to arrange dhikr sessions.' 5 Muhammad 
al-ShinnawI had initiated 'Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha'ranl into his 
way and designated him to teach dhikr and to educate murids in AH 
932. 76 After Muhammad’s death his sons, including 'Abd al-Quddus, 
who became his successor, were hostile to the powerful disciple al- 
Sha'ranl, but he served them and asked 'Abd al-Quddus to guide 
him as his shaykh. In the event, 'Abd al-Quddus became a disciple 
of al-Sha'ranl, who initiated and guided him in the Ahmadl way. 77 
This relationship presumably also encompassed the son of 'Abd al- 
Quddus, 'All, father of Abu’l-Mawahib Ahmad al-ShinnawI. 

Muhammad Badr al-Dln al-GhazzI {A/E} [d.984/1 576] 

His family migrated from Gaza to Damascus ten generations before 
he was born in AH 904, and quickly became well established and 


29 


A Prayer across Time 


respected there for its learning. His father Radi al-Dln reportedly 
took Badr al-Dln while a toddler to a shaykh who conferred upon 
him the khirqa, taught him dhikr and gave him ijdzas .' 8 Early instruc- 
tion received from his father was supplemented by instruction from 
the ulama of Damascus (he studied hadith and tasawwuf in particular 
under Badr al-Dln Hasan Ibn al-Shuwaykh al-MaqdisI). He accom- 
panied his father to Cairo at the age of twelve, and stayed there for 
five years, during which time he studied under various authorities, 
particularly Zakarlya al-Ansarl. His father also acquired ijdzas, for 
him from Jalal al-Dln al-Suyutl and introduced him to the saints 
of Egypt. They returned to Damascus in 921. 

Badr al-Dln launched a long career in Damascus as a teacher (in- 
cluding in the Umayyad Mosque) and Shafi'i mufti. Ele produced 
many works, assumed several positions and drew students from far 
and wide, among them the great-grandfather of 'Abd al-Ghanl al- 
NabulusI, Isma'll (d.993). 9 He loved the sufis and was at pains to ad- 
vise them if he heard they had acted in a way contrary to the shari 'a. 
A respected and prominent figure, he was the father ofNajm al-Dln 
al-GhazzI. 


1 1 th century AH 

Abu’l-Mawahib Ahmad b. 'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus al-ShinnawI 

{F} [d. 1028/1619] 

Also known as al-Khaml and hailing from the important Egyptian 
sufi al-ShinnawI family, he was born in 975/1568 in Mahallat Ruh 
west of Cairo and studied in Cairo and Medina, where he settled. 80 A 
prominent sufi, he became the leading shaykh of the Naqshbandiyya 
in Medina in his time. The order was introduced to Medina (with 
the Shattariyya) by the Indian Shaykh Sibghatallah b. Ruhallah al- 
Sindl (al-Barwajl), who settled there in 1596 or 1605: he initiated al- 
Shinnawl, became his teacher, and authorised him to educate murids , 
teach the dhikr and confer the khirqa? 1 While he studied hadith with 
its major scholars, al-ShinnawI does not appear to have been regarded 


30 


Transmitters of the prayer 


as a hadith scholar himself . 82 Nonetheless, he emerged as a dominant 
figure in the intellectual milieu of the Haramayn, where he was an 
outspoken adherent of the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud (the Oneness 
of Being). His many students included Safi al-Dln al-Qushashl (who 
venerated his teacher as the saintly ‘Seal of his time’). Brockelmann 
lists five of al-ShinnawI’s works, including al-Iqlid al-faridfl tajrid al- 
taivhJd, on which al-NabulusI later wrote a commentary . 83 

'Abd al-Qadir b. Muhammad b. Yahya al-Husaynl al-Tabari 
al-Makkl al-Shafi'I {D} [d. 1033/1624] 

Grandson of Yahya b. Makram b. Muhibb al-Dln al-Tabari {D}, 
member of important sharifian family long established in Mecca 
and holders of the imamate of the Maqam Ibrahim since AH 673. 
Born in 976, by the age of twelve 'Abd al-Qadir had memorised the 
Qur’an and led Ramadan night prayers at the Maqam. From 991, he 
studied with prominent shaykhs (including, for example, al-Shams 
Muhammad al-Ramll al-Misrl al-Shafi'I and 'Abd al-Rahman al- 
Sharblnl), having received an ijdza from some of them to pass on the 
works he had already memorised. After encompassing a broad range 
of disciplines and works, he composed numerous texts, including, for 
example, Durrat al-asddf al-saniya fi dharwat al-atusaf al-Husaymya, 
'Uyun al-masd’il min a'ydn al-rasail, Ifhdm al-majdrT fl ifhdm al- 
Bukhdri and Ard’ is al-abkdr wa ghara is al-afkar. The biographer al- 
Muhibbl describes him as ‘the imam of Hijazi imams ’. 84 

Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI {A/E} [d. 1061/1651] 

Born in 977/1570, he attended the public lessons of his father Badr 
al-Dln al-GhazzI and received ijdzas from him while still a child 
(Badr al-Dln died when Najm al-Dln was seven years old). He 
studied under and received ijdzas from various scholars, 8 ’ then held 
office and taught from a young age in several locations, continuing 
thus throughout his long life. He was Shafi'i mufti in Damascus 
for thirty-five years up to his death (from 1025). He also taught ha- 
dith and read al-Bukhari in the Umayyad Mosque for twenty-seven 
years (from 1034). 86 Among his numerous and well-known students 


31 


A Prayer across Time 


was Isma'll, the father of 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusT (d.1062). 87 
He was also an early teacher and shaykh of 'Abd al-Ghanl al- 
NabulusI 88 himself and of Ibrahim al-Kuranl . 89 His numerous writ- 
ings encompass works on hadith, tafsTr (exegesis ),fiqh, tasawwuf and 
travelogues. As a historian, he is author of the biographical work al- 
Kawdkib al-sd’ira bi-ayan al-mi’a al-'dshira, and its continuation Lutf 
al-samar wa qatf al-thamar: min tarajim a'yan al-tabaqa al-ida min al- 
qarn al-hddi r ashar. His reputation and particularly his expertise in 
hadith 90 became known beyond Syria, especially in the Hijaz. He 
made twelve trips to the Haramayn: during the last one (1059), he was 
inundated with requests for ijdzas , including from scholars such as al- 
Shams Muhammad al-Babill, who expressed their admiration for his 
exceptional knowledge. 91 As far as his tarJqa affiliations are concerned, 
the primary one was to the Qadiriyya. Some of his contemporaries 
described him as one of the three abddl (category of saints) in Syria. 92 

Safi al-Dln Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Yunus al-Qushashl 

{B/C/D/F} [d.1071/1661] 

Flailing from a Jerusalem family with sharifian descent, his father 
(whose shaykh was the Maliki Muhammad b. 'Isa al-Tilimsanl) mi- 
grated to Medina. Safi al-Dln’s early education was under his father’s 
wing, and included a trip to Yemen in AH 1011, where he joined cir- 
cles of prominent ulama. Returning to Medina after a stay in Mecca, 
he met Abu’l-Mawahib al-ShinnawI, who initiated him into the 
sufi way. He studied under al-ShinnawI, Sibghatallah and numerous 
other shaykhs (perhaps as many as one hundred), becoming affiliated 
to many tarTqas including the Qadiriyya, Shattariyya, Shadhiliyya 
and Naqshbandiyya. He developed a close attachment to al-Shin- 
nawl, married his daughter, and became his khalifa (deputy) in life 
and later his successor as shaykh in the Shattariyya. A charismatic 
figure, he attracted a large influx of students and disciples in Medina 
and became established as one of the greatest sufis of his time, as 
well as a teacher of theology and shari 'a in his own right. 1 '' Ibrahim 
al-Kuranl was the most prominent of his students (and al-Qush- 
ashl was al-Kuranl’s major and most influential teacher): another was 


32 


Transmitters of the prayer 


'Abdallah b. Salim al-Basrl (d.1134). 94 He has been counted as one 
of four influential ulama who would shape the Medinan intellectual 
milieu of the late 17 th century. Thanks to his charisma and learning, 
al-Qushashl left behind a cohesive group of followers loyal to his ap- 
proach and cutting across fiqh madhhabs and sufi tarlqas. 95 

Al-Qushashl was described by the biographer al-Muhibbl as ‘the 
imam of all those who believed in Tvahdat al-wujudf 6 His impor- 
tance in transmitting the doctrines of the school of Ibn 'Arab! to 
various parts of the Muslim world through his students has been 
emphasised: for example, the Sumatran 'Abd al-Ra’uf Singkel was a 
student of his for twenty years. 9 ' Al-Qushashl has been identified as 
a link in one of the still ‘living’ chains of transmission of the khirqa 
akbarlya. He reportedly claimed the office of Seal of Muhammadan 
Sainthood for himself, attaining this after having studied under five 
teachers. 98 

Al-Qushashl’s interest in theology has been recognised: while the 
majority of his writings were glosses or commentaries on major sufi 
tracts (such as al-Jlll’s aTlnsdn al-kamiP) as well as works on usiil (the 
principles of the faith), he thus also compiled three treatises on the 
issue of kasb (acquisition), a principal concept of Asha'ri doctrine, at 
least one of which invited some controversy. He was also involved in 
hadith scholarship, encompassing sufi interpretations of hadith" and 
an approach that adumbrated emerging trends that became more dis- 
tinct in the next generation. 100 On this and other grounds, a possible 
(embryonic) reformist tendency can be identified alongside his mys- 
tical vocation and commitment to maintaining sufi traditions. 101 

Zayn al- 'Abidin b. 'Abd al-Qadir al-Tabari al-Husaynl al-Makkl 
al-Shafi'I {D} [d. 1078/1667] 

Born in AH 1002, he studied under his father 'Abd al-Qadir b. 
Muhammad b. Yahya al-Husaynl al-Tabari and the prominent 
shaykhs of Mecca and Medina such as 'Abd al-Wahid al-Hisarl al- 
Mu'ammar, receiving ijdzas from them. Among others, Muhammad 
al-Shilll Ba'alawl and al-Hasan b. 'All al-'Ujayml al-Makkl received 
ijdzas from him. He was not as celebrated as his father. 102 


33 


A Prayer across Time 


12 th century AH 

Ibrahim al-Kuranl {B/C/D/F} [d. 1101/1689] 

The most outstanding of Ahmad al-Qushashl’s disciples, he shared 
a special relationship with his teacher, and became his son-in-law and 
designated heir. 103 Born in 1023/1615, al-Kuranl studied a wide range 
of subjects under many teachers in his native Shahrazur and then in 
Baghdad, Damascus, Cairo and Medina, where he finally settled. 104 
He was initiated into and authorised to teach several tartqas includ- 
ing the Shattariyya, Qadiriyya, Chishtiyya and his primary tariqa , 
the Naqshbandiyya. On al-Qushashl’s death in 1661 he succeeded 
him as supreme shaykh of the Shattariyya as well as in his major 
teaching post, 101 and as ‘the chief exponent of Ibn 'Arabl’s legacy in 
Medina’. 106 

A Shafi'i 'alim, al-Kuranl’s importance to the intellectual life of 
Medina in his time is such that he has been described as ‘the doyen 
of the city’s ulama’. 10 Flis influence reached far beyond Medina, 
however, as the ‘undisputed leader’ of the school of Ibn 'Arabl in his 
epoch. 108 For example, his influence on Indonesian Islam has been 
documented, mediated through his important Indonesian disciples 
like 'Abd al-Ra’uf Singkel. 109 One of al-Kuranl’s works on the prin- 
ciple of wahdat al-wujiid, Ithdf al-dhakT, was written at the request of 
Indonesian disciples, and another (refuting an earlier denunciation 
of the principle as heretical pantheism by Nuruddin Raniri [d. 1666] 
of Acheh) was produced for an Indonesian audience. 110 Leading 
Indian ulama requested a fatwa from him (among the prestigious 
ulama of the Hijaz) in 1682 on the ideas of Ahmad Sirhindl (d.1624), 
founder of the Mujaddidiyya branch of the Naqshbandiyya, whom 
they opposed. 111 

A versatile and prolific author, al-Kuranl’s interests encompassed 
hadith, fiqh and kaldm (theology) alongside tasawwuf. His empha- 
sis on hadith as a source for understanding and defining aspects of 
religion and for shari 'a (and thus his role in the rising 17 th — 18 th cen- 
tury interest in hadith scholarship as a means for reforming^/; and 


34 


Transmitters of the prayer 


theology) was such that, after his death, there was a remarkable in- 
crease among his Medinan students and junior colleagues in writing 
commentaries on hadith collections. 112 Described as having been ‘by 
nature a conciliator’, 113 his complex intellectual position reconciled 
his loyalty to Ibn 'Arabl’s teaching with commitment to a salafi out- 
look. He thus reinterpreted the doctrine of wahdat aTvmjud in ac- 
cordance with the orthodox Islamic view by emphasising the Qur’an 
and Sunna as the ultimate frame of reference and insisting on the 
interdependency of the sufi vision and the obligations of shari 'a ‘in 
accordance with al-salaf al-sdlih (the venerable forefathers)’. It seems 
he undertook to revisit the major issues of sufism and theology with 
a view to reconstructing their dominant modes (expressed through 
i vahdat al-wujiid and late Ash ' ari dogma) , in or der to bring them into 
line with what he saw as the original Islamic view, drawing on the 
legacy of Ibn Hanbal and Ibn Taymlya (and the latter’s student Ibn 
Qayyim al-jawzlya) in projecting his vision of this original view. 114 
On this basis, he stands as a significant precursor to the reformist 
currents that were to gain powerful expression across the Muslim 
world during the 18 th century. Effectively replacing al-Qushashl’s 
authority, he served as an important point of reference for a large 
number of ulama throughout the 18 th and early 19 th centuries, con- 
tributing to the rehabilitation of Ibn Taymlya and to opening the 
door for the re-emergence of the salafi school of thought in different 
parts of the Muslim world. 115 

Muhammad al-Budayrl al-Dimyatl {B} [d. 1140/1728] 

Known as Ibn al-Mayyit, he hailed from a sharifian family whose an- 
cestor came to Dimyat from Jerusalem. After his early education in 
Dimyat, he moved to al-Azhar. During 1091-92 (1680-81) he joined 
Ibrahim al-Kuranl for a year, became closely identified with him 
and studied under him works on tasawumf hadith and fiqh. While 
he regarded himself principally as a Naqshbandi (he later shifted 
this affiliation to a Sirhindl silsila specifically), he had affiliations 
to several tarlqas. He travelled between Dimyat, Cairo, Medina 
and Jerusalem, and became acquainted in each place with the most 


35 


A Prayer across Time 


illustrious circles of ulama of the time. In Cairo he was closely asso- 
ciated with the Bakrls, and in Damascus with the circles of 'Abd al- 
Ghanl al-NabuIusI and his disciples. 116 He was highly regarded as 
a hadith scholar and sufi teacher. Mustafa al-Bakrl studied hadith 
with him in Jerusalem and was initiated into the Naqshbandiyya by 
him. Al-BudayrI was also the main teacher of Muhammad b. Salim 
al-HifnawI . 117 

'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI {A/E} [d. 1143/1731] 

Damascene sufi, hadith scholar, 118 traveller and poet. His prolific 
writings are underpinned by veneration of Ibn 'Arab! and defence 
of his metaphysical system, and dominated by the concept of wahdat 
al-wujud : he considered himself Ibn 'Arabl’s spiritual son and disci- 
ple, and was his devotee and interpreter. He taught at the Umayyad 
Mosque and the Salimiyya madrasa at Ibn 'Arabl’s mosque-tomb 
complex (from AH 1115), but his self-appointed role was as defender 
of sufism and its controversial practices and doctrines. His stance 
provoked serious criticism and attack, especially because he taught 
the works of Ibn 'Arab! to common folk as well as to the elite. 119 Af- 
filiated to the Qadiri and Naqshbandi tarlqas, he seems to have had 
limited participation and interest in tariqa sufism, and to have set 
more store by his own uwaysi or ‘Theo-didactic’ sufism, including 
especially his link to Ibn 'Arab! as uwaysi master (although he him- 
self had close disciples, this was not in a tariqa framework). 120 

By the age of twelve, 'Abd al-Ghanl had already received ijazas 
(including in Ibn 'Arabl’s works) in the company of his father Isma'il 
from Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI among other high-ranking ulama such 
as 'Abd al-Baql TaqI al-Dln b. Mawahib al-Hanball (the Hanbali 
mufti of Damascus). Elis father, who was his first teacher and who 
died when he was twelve, appears as the prior link in several of 'Abd 
al-Ghanl’s ijazas in hadith collections and the writings of Ibn 'Arabl: 
he had in fact been given the ijazas of his father en masse as a child. 121 
It is noteworthy that one of his last compositions was a commentary 
on the salawdt of Ibn 'Arabl. 122 


36 


Transmitters of the prayer 

Tahir b. Ibrahim b. Hasan al-Kuranl [Muhammad Abu’l-Tahir] 

{D} [d.1145/1733] 

Born in Medina in 1081, he studied with his father Ibrahim al- 
Kuranl and other great shaykhs, including his father’s colleagues 
and associates like al-Hasan b. 'All al-'Ujayml al-Makkl and 'Abdal- 
lah b. Salim al-Basrl. 123 He took his father’s position as a teacher in 
the Prophet’s Mosque in Medina and rose to assume the position of 
Shafi'i mufti in the city for a time. On his father’s death he succeeded 
him as supreme shaykh of the Shattariyya (but the leading position 
of the ulama of Medina fell to one of Ibrahim’s students). Plis works 
include Ikhtisdr shark shawahid al-Ridd al-Baghdddl '. m The students 
who attended his many lessons (through which his father’s teachings 
continued to be disseminated) included the Indian hadith scholar 
Muhammad Hayat al-Sindl (d. 1163/1749), 125 who taught hadith in 
Medina for twenty-five years to numerous students, among them 
Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Wahhab. They included also the great Indian 
Naqshbandi reformist Shah Wall Allah (d.1177/1763). The latter’s 
stay in Medina during 1731-32 in Tahir’s circle had a lasting impact 
on his intellectual orientations: according to Shah Wall Allah’s son, 
it amounted to a turning point in his career. 126 Al-Kattani observes that 
his own transmission from Tahir proceeds via Muhammad Sa'ld 
Sunbul, among others. 127 

Mustafa Kamal al-Dln al-Bakrl {A/B/C} [d. 1162/1749] 

Born in Damascus and reputed to have revived the Khalwati tariqa 
in the Arab mashriq (east) of the 18 th century. He was the most cel- 
ebrated and important disciple of 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI: he 
read several of Ibn 'Arabl’s works under him during his sojourns in 
Damascus and his own writings were to be profoundly influenced 
by Ibn 'Arabl’s thought. Pie studied hadith under Muhammad al- 
Budayrl al-Dimyatl in Jerusalem and under 'Abdallah b. Salim al- 
Basrl: he was also a student of al-Kuranl’s son Ilyas (d.1138), who had 
moved to Damascus. 1211 He was initiated into the Naqshbandiyya, 
Qadiriyya and Khalwatiyya, in the latter case by a shaykh who fol- 
lowed the way of the Qarabashiyya branch. Al-Bakrl became his sole 


37 


A Prayer across Time 


successor on the shaykh’s death in 1121/1709, having earlier been 
granted a general permission to initiate and appoint khalifas. He 
went on to gain many disciples especially in Cairo and Jerusalem: 
his most important khalifa was Muhammad b. Salim al-Hifnawi. 
Al-BakrI was a prolific writer (mainly on siiluk and adab, the sufi 
path, its culture and manners, but he also composed awrad {pi. of 
wird}, of which the best known is Wird al-sahar). Like his teacher 
al-NabulusI (on whom he wrote a reverential biography, and from 
whom he records that he received a general ijaza for all his lines of 
transmission and a specific one for his writings), he laid claim to a 
direct relation to Ibn 'Arab!, and direct authorisation by him. Like 
him, he too made several extensive journeys, moving especially be- 
tween Jerusalem and Cairo, where he died. 129 

Muhammad Sa'ld (b. Muhammad) Sunbul [al-Makkl] 

{DJ [d. 1175/1762] 

Prominent Meccan scholar and Shafi'i mufti: he transmitted 
from Tahir b. Ibrahim al-Kuranl among others, and to his son 
Muhammad Tahir Sunbul, among others. 130 

Muhammad b. Salim al-HifnawI/al-HifnI I3l {B/C} [d. 1181/1767] 
An important disciple and associate of Mustafa al-Bakrl involved in 
renewing activity of the Khalwatiyya in Egypt. He was born in AH 
1100 in Hifna, a village in the Bilbis district of Egypt, and studied 
from a young age in Cairo. On receiving ijdzas from his teachers there 
(the best known including Muhammad al-Budayrl al-Dimyatl, 
through whom he received his Naqshbandi affiliation), in 1122 he 
established lessons in logic, fiqh, usul , hadith and kaldm attended by 
many students. Lie produced many works and became known for 
his kardmdt. Lie had been introduced to the sufi way by a certain 
Ahmad al-Shadhill al-Maghribl (known as al-Maqqarl): he then met 
Mustafa al-Bakrl in 1133, who initiated him into the Qarabashiyya- 
Khalwatiyya and trained him in its path. Al-Bakrl eventually placed 
him above all his khalifas, and he became the only one he had in- 
vested with absolute authority who also survived him. Al-LIifnawI 

38 


Transmitters of the prayer 


is reputed to have succeeded in reviving the tarJqa across Egypt, 
attracting large numbers of people and introducing it to the com- 
munity of ulama at al-Azhar. Among his important khalifas Idiscvples 
were Mahmud al-Kurdl, 'Abdallah al-SharqawI (Shaykh al-Azhar) 
and Ahmad al-Dardayr, who is perhaps the best known. 113 

Muhammad al-Tafilatl al-Khalwatl {B} [d. 1191/1777] 

Brockelmann gives his full name as Muhammad b. Muhammad b. 
al-Tayyib al-Tafilatl al-Maghribl, 131 al-Muradl as Muhammad b. 
Muhammad al-Tayyib al-Malikl al-Hanafl al-Tafilatl al-Maghribl. 134 
The narrative here is based on al-Muradl’s biographical entry. 11 ’ 
Born in Morocco, al-Tafilatl first studied under his father, a man 
of moderate learning. Before reaching puberty he taught students 
al-SanusTya , which he had studied under Shaykh Muhammad al- 
Sa'dl al-Jaza’irl. He travelled to Tripoli and from there to al-Azhar 
in Cairo. He remained in Egypt for two years and eight months 
and studied under Muhammad b. Salim al-HifnawI, among many 
others. While travelling by sea to visit his mother he was cap- 
tured and taken to Malta, where he was held for over two years. 
He engaged there in a lengthy debate on matters of Muslim belief 
with Christian monks, among them one with some knowledge of 
Arabic. This monk eventually gave up the debate defeated, aston- 
ished that such knowledge could be held by someone young enough 
to be his grandson. Muhammad’s renown spread in Malta among 
monks and notables, and he was treated respectfully wherever he 
went. A vision he had eventually sealed his release and he made for 
Egypt, travelling from there to the Hijaz several times. He went 
to Yemen, Oman, Basra, Aleppo, Damascus and Anatolia ( al-Rum ) 
and settled in Jerusalem, where he was appointed Hanafi mufti. His 
works number some eighty: in addition to his commentary on the 
prayer ( al-Durr al-aghla bi-sharh al-Datvr al-a' la), m Brockelmann 
mentions his Husn al-istiqsa bi-ma sahha wa th ah at a fVl- mas/ id al- 
aqsaf 1 Al-Tafilatl appears in the chains of authorities of various later 
Damascene scholars. 138 


39 


A Prayer across Time 


Mahmud al-Kurdl {C} [d. 1195/1780-81] 

A khalifa of Muhammad b. Salim al-HifnawI and known also as 
al-Khalwatl, he was born in Kurdistan. He adopted a life of pious 
devotion, asceticism and isolation early on, and is reputed to have 
met frequently with Khidr and to have received the contents of al- 
Ghazall’s Ihyd’ 'ulum al-din without reading. When aged eighteen 
he saw al-HifnawI in a dream, and was told that this was his shaykh. 
He travelled to Egypt to find him, was initiated by him into the 
Khalwati way and eventually granted an ijdza to bring people into 
it: al-HifnawI would send those who wished to enter the way to 
him. He also developed a close relationship with Mustafa al-Bakrl, 
whom he had met when the latter came to Cairo. He was celebrated 
for his baraka and the fact that he frequently saw the Prophet in 
dreams. After al-HifnawI’s death al-Kurdl reportedly brought many 
people into the way and appointed khalifas himself. He produced a 
treatise as the result of a dream in which he saw Ibn 'Arabl give him 
a key and tell him to ‘open the vault’ (there is a commentary by his 
khalifa and Shaykh al-Azhar 'Abdallah al-SharqawI on this). He is 
also author of al-Suluk li-abnd’ al-muluk.™ 

Muhammad Kamal al-Dln al-Bakrl, Abu’l-Futuh 

{A} [d.l 196/1781— 82] 

Born in Jerusalem in 1143/1731, he was shaykh to the historian al- 
Muradl (author of the biographical work Silk al-durar). W] Among 
others, he studied under Muhammad b. Salim al-HifnawI and 
Muhammad, a third son of Ibrahim al-Kuranl. He took the Khal- 
wati tariqa from his father Mustafa al-Bakrl. His works include 
a biography of his father, Kashf al-zunun fT asma al-shuruh wa'l- 
mutun, a commentary on al-Saldt al-Mashishiya and a diwan. 141 

Muhammad b. Mahmud b. 'All al-Damunl {C} [d. after 1199/1785] 
In full Muhammad b. Mahmud b. 'All al-Damunl al-Shafi'I al- 
Khalwatl al-Naqshbandl al-Jalwatl, from al-Damun, Palestine: au- 
thor in 1199/1785 of HikamT 1 He entitled his commentary on the 
prayer al-Durr al-thamin li-sharh Dawr al-a’ la li-sidi Muhyi al-Din. 


40 


Transmitters of the prayer 


He describes how he was asked by his close and saintly companion 
Husayn al-Hisnl 14 ’ to elaborate for him the contents of the prayer. 
Having consulted and sought a guiding sign, he spent a few days 
in the hope of receiving divine permission to proceed, seeking this 
through the mediation of Ibn 'Arabl, who might reveal the prayer’s 
secrets to him as its author. Once permission was received, he began. 
Al-DamunI mentions Ibn 'Arab! first among his teachers ‘whose in- 
sight is elixir’. Having detailed his chain of authorities, he adds that 
he has ‘another, more elevated, chain - for it is from me to [Ibn 
'Arabl]: it was he who gave me to drink of his pure wine, quench- 
ing my thirst in the world of similitudes, then guided me to him. 
It was he who brought me to live in Damascus, and gave me per- 
mission to guide elite and common folk alike. Thanks be to God 
for these momentous blessings, and for the greatest blessing of all: 
my attachment ( intisabi ) to this imam.’ 144 His father Mahmud b. 'All 
al-Damunl authored a defence of al-NabulusI, al-Shihdb al-qabasi ft 
radd man radda 'aid 'Abd al-Gham . , 145 


13 th century AH 

Ibrahim b. Isma'll b. 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI 

{E} [d. 1222/1807] 

Ibrahim’s father Isma'll (b.1085) was the only one of 'Abd al-Ghanl’s 
sons to survive him. Born in AEI 1138, Ibrahim became an outstand- 
ing 'dlim of his time. 146 A prominent member of Damascene society, 
he inherited his father’s teaching post at the Salimiyya mosque, 147 
and became shaykh qurrd’ (leading Qur’an reciter). 148 The conflu- 
ence of several chains of transmission relating to al-Futuhdt al- 
Makkiya through him is noteworthy. 149 

Muhammad al-Jundl al-'Abbasi al-Ma'arrl {A} [d.1264/1848] 

He served as Hanafi mufti in his place of origin, Ma'arrat Nu'man, 
Syria. Initially a follower of Shaykh Khalid al-Naqshbandl, who was 
responsible for spreading the Naqshbandiyya-Mujaddidiyya widely 


41 


A Prayer across Time 


among Arabs, Kurds and Turks during the early 19 th century, it is 
most likely that al-Jundl did not maintain contact with his successors 
after Shaykh Khalid’s death in 1242/1827. 150 

Muhammad Amin al-Jundl al- 'Abbas! al-Ma'arrl 

{A} [d.1285/1868] 

Born in Ma'arrat Nu'man, Syria in AH 1229, he was educated by his 
father Muhammad al-Jundl , 151 from whom he took the Khalwati 
way. In Aleppo he studied hadith under Mahmud Efendi al-Mar'ashl 
and was a student of the mufti 'Abd al-Rahman al-Mudarris. Re- 
turning to Ma'arrat Nu'man, he served there as qddJ and then as 
mufti following his father’s death in 1264, until 1266 when he was 
summoned to Damascus to serve as Arab scribe of the Turkish army 
in Syria. In 1277 he was appointed Hanafi mufti of Damascus, and 
remained in this post until his removal in 1284. Thereafter he was 
appointed to the Ottoman state shiird (council) in the capital, and 
served on several important official missions. Ilis writings (some in 
Arabic, others Ottoman Turkish) include a work on the excellence of 
Syria, and a diwan. His Ottoman Turkish commentary on the Dawr 
was written in 1280, while he was still Hanafi mufti of Damascus. 
A reformist 'alim, he was proficient in the teachings of Ibn 'Arabl as 
well as the new sciences of the era. When the Amir 'Abd al-Qadir 
al-Jaza'irl settled in Damascus, al-Jundl became one of his close as- 
sociates: he also participated with him in rescuing Christians, and 
wrote poetry in praise of him. 152 

Muhammad Tahir Sunbul [al-Makkl] {D} 

Son of Muhammad Sa'ld Sunbul, prominent Hijazi scholar who 
transmitted from his father and transmitted to, among others, Yasln 
b. 'Abdallah al-Mlrghanl . 1 ’ 3 

Muhammad Yasln b. 'Abdallah b. Ibrahim al-Mlrghanl {D} 
'Abdallah b. Ibrahim al-Mlrghanl al-Makkl al-Ta’ifl the father 
(d. 1207/1793), known as al-Mahjub, was a prominent sufi and in- 
fluential ’alim. Born in Mecca into a sharifian family, he attached 


42 


Transmitters of the prayer 


himself to Yusuf al-Mahdall (who was known as al-qutb or the axis of 
his time) and became an uwaysi sufi after the latter’s death, receiving 
learning directly from the Prophet. While stories of his kardmdt are 
plentiful, he also left a substantial number of works. 154 He has been 
counted as part of the late 18 th century reformist network, of which 
the Plaramayn was the crossroads (his students included Muhammad 
Murtada al-Zabldl, for example). The Mlrghanl family appears to 
have been politically active: in 1166/1752-53, a time of political up- 
heaval in Mecca, 'Abdallah had moved to Ta’if apparently as a result 
of his opposition to the Zaydi sharifs. 155 

One of 'Abdallah’s sons became the father ofMuhammad 'Uthman 
al-Mlrghanl (d.1852). Born a year after his grandfather 'Abdallah’s 
death, 'Uthman became one of the most important students of the 
major reformist Moroccan sufi teacher Ahmad b. Idris (d. 1837), and 
founder of the Khatmiyya (or Mlrghaniyya) order. 156 'Uthman’s pa- 
ternal uncle Muhammad Yasin became his guardian upon the death 
of his father when 'Uthman was ten years old. Himself childless, 
Muhammad Yasin took on his nephew’s education. Muhammad 
Yasin later taught hadith to another student of Ahmad b. Idris, the 
Yemeni al-Hasan 'Akish, when he came to Mecca. He was also a 
teacher of Muhammad b. 'All al-SanusI (d. 1276/1859), Ahmad b. 
Idris’ closest student and founder of the Sanusiyya tarlqa , when he 
arrived in Mecca in 1241/1826. Muhammad Yasin wrote at least one 
work, 'Unwdn ahl al- indy a ' aid kashf ghawdmid al-nuqdya, a gloss on 
al-Suyutl’s Itmdm al-dirdyaf" 

Abu’l-Mahasin Muhammad b. Khalil (al-Mashlshl) al-Qawuqjl 
al-TarabulusI al-Shaml al-Hanafl {D} [d. 1305/1888] 

Possibly also known as Shams al-Dln, he was born in 1225/1810, and 
was a hadith scholar, sufi and faqih. He has been described as l musnid 
bildd al-Shdmd (‘the most important hadith transmitter of Greater 
Syria’) of his time, and his chains occupied a pivotal role well into 
the 20 th century in most of Egypt, Syria and the Hijaz. He trans- 
mitted from many scholars, including Muhammad b. 'All al-SanusI, 
al-Burhan al-Bajurl and Yasin b. 'Abdallah al-Mlrghanl (he wrote 


43 


A Prayer across Time 


a commentary on al-Mu jam. al-ivajiz by 'Abdallah al-Mlrghanl). 158 
A prolific writer, he produced some one hundred works, including 
many on hadith. 159 His al-Tawr al-aghld 'ala al-ivird al-musamma bPl- 
Dawr al-a' la was printed in Damascus, AH 1301. 160 Brocklemann 
also lists a commentary on Hizb al-bahr entitled Khuldsat al-zahr 'ala 
Hizb al-bahr : m Noteworthy, too, is his Shawariq al-anwdr al-jallya 
fi asariid al-sada al-Shddhillya , for al-Qawuqji was a Shadhili shaykh 
and founder of a sub-order of the tariqa which seems to have taken 
his name. 162 He died in Mecca. 163 


Chains and authorisations 

The chains elucidated here are embedded in a vast web of intercon- 
nections among members of the ahlal-' ilm (community of scholars) 
spanning the centuries of Islamic history, a network of personal 
contacts forming a highway along which authority, learning and 
baraka have travelled from the past into the future while criss- 
crossing the lands of Islam. Individuals sought out ijdzas through 
personal contact with shaykhs who had themselves acquired ijdzas 
through personal contact: the ijdza was thus in part ‘an emblem of 
a bond to a shaykh’. 164 While it served the forging of connections 
to powerful men of the learned elite (those older and more know- 
ledgeable), it also made possible the appropriation of some of their 
authority, and that of others in the associated chains of transmis- 
sion. Finally, it acted as a vehicle for the acquisition and transmis- 
sion of baraka, of which ' ilm or learning was one important form. 
The conferring of an ijdza thus admitted an individual to a particu- 
lar scholarly and spiritual genealogy, and this was just as impor- 
tant as the precise identity and content of the work(s) transmitted 
(if indeed not more important in some circumstances). In general 
terms, the mijTz (granter of an authorisation) was the key to in- 
sertion into chains of transmission of 'ilm so highly valued that 
the resulting pedigrees rivalled blood-lines in importance. 165 This 
importance is reflected in the careful attention given to recording 


44 


Chains and authorisations 


and incorporating chains of transmission of texts, as in the case of 
the Datur. 

Turning to the plausibility of individual links within our chains 
and the ijdzas that underpin them, those links identified appear gen- 
erally compatible with the chronology, known associations (especially 
relations with shaykhs and teachers) and geographical movements of 
the figures in question. Of particular interest are nine links under- 
pinned by ijdzas conferred on young children who typically had not 
yet reached the age of reason . 166 In some cases, as set out above, we 
have reports of these children receiving ijdzas from the authorities 
in question in the company of their fathers (and in one case, of the 
father soliciting ijdzas specifically for them, another common prac- 
tice ). 16 Perhaps a ‘child ijdza' stands up more successfully to scrutiny 
when the text concerned is a small prayer which children, accus- 
tomed to memorising Qur’an from an early age, could readily have 
committed to heart at the instigation of fathers eager to place them 
under its protection, and to acquire for them the potential benefits 
associated with the accompanying ijdza and chain . 168 

Insertion of an individual into one of our chains through an ijdza 
conferred on them the baraka of the line of transmission, intensify- 
ing the baraka of the prayer itself. It also brought them into ultimate 
contact with the prayer’s author. It was not just a case of acquiring, 
committing to memory and inscribing on the heart the prayer text 
(itself undoubtedly baraka bearing and encompassing the ‘perfect 
and complete’ Word, as we shall see below), something which could 
be done from a written copy. Initiation into the prayer was thus as 
much a case of participating in the spiritual lineage anchored in its 
saintly author and transmitted through a living shaykh . 169 Moreover, 
it is likely that even into the modern period prayers like the Daivr 
were mainly experienced as oral performances rather than written 
texts, further underlining the importance of personal contact. 

Regarding certain specifics of our chains, we might ask whether 
any of our figures appear in chains of transmission associated with 
other works by Ibn 'Arabl. Yahya lists a number of such chains which 
can be compared with the six examined here . 1 0 {E} from Ibn 'Arab! 


45 


A Prayer across Time 


through to al-Suyutl is repeated in four chains, viz. 2a (attached to 
RG 13a, Akhbdr mashdyikh al-Maghrib\ RG 30, Anqa mughrib\ RG 
38, al-Arba'un hadith\ RG 134, al-Fath al-Fdsv, RG 135, al-Futiihdt 
al-Makkiya\ RG 150, Fusils al- h ikarn ; RG 336, al-Kashf al-kulli and 
RG 725, al-Tafsir) and 6a, 6e and 6f (all three attached to RG 135, al- 
Futuhdt al-Makkiya) . 1 7 1 In like fashion, {F} from Ibn 'Arabl through to 
al-Qushashl is repeated in chain 6d attached to al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya 
(with the link between Zakarlya al-Ansarl and al-Jabartl al-Zabldl 
missing, viz., Abu’l-Fath Muhammad b. al-Qaymanl al-Mara'l) and 
from Ibn 'Arabl through to al-Sha'ranl in chain 6c attached to al- 
Futuhdt al-Makkiya with the same omission. The missing chain of 
authorities linking al-Qushashl back to Ibn 'Arabl in {B} and {C} 
as elaborated in {F} is thus mostly corroborated by Yahya’s 6d i. 172 
Chains 6a, b, c, d, e and f (all attached to al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya) all 
culminate in the grandson of 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI, Ibrahim b. 
Isma'll (see {E}). Finally, several well-known links appearing in our 
chains reappear in those listed in Yahya: these include Badr al-Dln 
al-GhazzI ~ Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI ({A}; Yahya’s 6b and 6d ii) and 
Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl ~ Zakarlya al-Ansarl ({A}; Yahya’s 6d). 

Referred to briefly above, al-Qushashl’s chain of transmission 
from Ibn 'Arabl stands out for the important place it occupies on our 
chain map, for his status, and for his association with the prayer in 
a further copy, where its attribution to Ibn 'Arabl and a description 
of its properties are given on his authority. 173 Al-Tafilatl {B} and al- 
Damunl {C} both refer to this chain without elaboration using the 
phrase bi-sanadihi al-muttasil ild [Ibn Arabi] (‘through his chain of 
transmission going back to [Ibn 'Arabl]’), implying perhaps that it 
was very well known at the time. 174 (It is noteworthy that the silsila 
of the khirqa akbariya as given by al-Murtada al-Zabldl also connects 
al-Qushashl to Ibn 'Arabl without elaboration.) 17 ’ {F} provides an in- 
dication of one chain from Ibn 'Arabl to al-Qushashl, while {D} pro- 
vides an alternative through Zayn al-'Abidln al-Tabari al-Makkl. 16 

More than five generations after Ibn 'Arabl’s death, key geograph- 
ical foci in the routes of the prayer mapped through the chains are 
the Flijaz (Mecca and Medina); Syria (Damascus); Egypt (Cairo); 

46 


Chains and authorisations 


and Palestine (Jerusalem). Two 17 th — 18 th century figures who served 
as a nexus between different geographical centres through their trav- 
els are Muhammad al-Budayrl al-Dimyatl {B} and Mustafa al-Bakri 
{A/B/C}. 177 Al-Budayrl connected the influential Hijazi centre 178 
with Cairo (where al-HifnawI studied under him), and with Jeru- 
salem (where Mustafa al-Bakri studied under him). Al-Bakri, too, 
connected Damascus and Cairo (as well as Jerusalem), but without 
the direct Hijazi link: 179 born in 1688 CE, al-Bakri’s link to Ibrahim 
al-Kuranl (d.1689 CE) in {C} should most likely be ruled out in fa- 
vour of an omission, probably of the latter’s son Ilyas, with whom 
al-Bakri studied in Damascus. It is noteworthy that al-Tafilatl ap- 
parently first acquired the prayer from al-Hifnawi during his early 
sojourn in Cairo, making it possible for him to transmit it during his 
extensive travels thereafter. Such figures often formed part of very 
extensive scholar networks, through which the prayer may well have 
been transmitted into more distant regions of the Islamic world. 180 

A strong Naqshbandi or Khalwati association is evident among 
the figures in our chains from the 17 th century, 181 but for many of 
them multiple tarJqa affiliations were the norm, especially prior to 
the 18 th or 19 th centuries. The prayer was thus used alongside litur- 
gical and devotional prescriptions associated with particular tarJqa 
affiliations, whether multiple or single. Prayers attributed to the 
eponymous founders of tarJqas have found a natural constituency 
among those affiliated to these tarJqas, where they have also been 
routinely recited in collective rituals. Indeed the emergence of an 
independent tarJqa from an existing one has often been accompa- 
nied by the composition of new ahzab (pi. of hizb). m Although not 
associated exclusively with any particular tarJqa , the saintly stature 
of the Dawr’s author appears to have secured its circulation and use 
within many different tarJqas. 


47 


A Prayer across Time 


Windows onto Islamic culture and thought 

How can the chains discussed here, which encompass several major 
figures of Islamic scholarship and tasawwuf, illuminate trends in his- 
torical Islamic culture and thought? Alongside those who may be 
described as non-reformist (and who appear to have been uncompro- 
mising in their defence of sufi culture, including its more controver- 
sial elements), it is noteworthy that these figures also feature ulama 
of reformist orientation, those critical of aspects of the prevailing 
religious-cultural milieu and the existing order. Some sought to 
contain sufi ‘excesses’ by reasserting the interdependence of spheres 
of tasawwuf and shari 'a, and addressed other aspects of the dominant 
culture by emphasising the primacy of the Qur’an and Sunna as 
the ultimate framework for religious understanding and the source 
of shari 'a. Such ulama often expressed appreciation for the reform- 
ist legacy of Ibn Taymlya (d. 1 328), and their positions evince salafi 
tendencies, whether in matters of kalam or fiqh, attitudes towards 
rnadhhab affiliation, or the emphasis of hadith scholarship as a means 
to reassert scriptural primacy, for example. Focusing on such figures 
in the chains serves to highlight the complex, overlapping identities 
of historical Islamic culture, which could contemplate a profound 
commitment to sufism (including the embrace of wahdat al-wujiid ) 
alongside a salaft-inspired reformist outlook (the latter dimension 
being at times underreported in the context of Ibn 'Arab! studies). 
While its content presents no specific doctrinal problem, the use 
and transmission of the prayer by such figures nonetheless furnishes 
evidence of their conviction of its author’s importance (and saintly 
status), underlining an inclusive commitment to his legacy upheld in 
tandem with salafi tendencies. 

In the 9 th /15 th century, Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl’s association with 
the prayer is noteworthy in the light of his ambivalence towards Ibn 
'Arabl, and his favourable view of Ibn Taymlya. 18 ' His reservations 
concerning the prayer’s author, such as they were, did not invalidate 
for him the baraka that flowed from use of it, received through a chain 

48 


Windows onto Islatnic culture and thought 


directly from its author. In the 10 th /16 th century 'Abd al-Wahhab al- 
Sha'ranl’s association with the prayer is noteworthy when viewed 
not in terms of his capacity as an apologist for Ibn 'Arabi, but as 
the first in a long line of late reformist or salafi-oriented sufi ulama, 
followed in the H th -12 th /17 th -18 th centuries by the highly influential 
al-Qushashl (heir to al-Sha'ranl’s legacy) and especially his student 
Ibrahim al-Kuranl, and the latter’s students of the next generation. 
As in al-Kurani’s case, a number of these later sufi-salafi ulama re- 
interpreted wahdat al-wujud, in its capacity as the most controversial 
aspect of sufi doctrine, to make it conform to Islamic orthodoxy. At 
the same time, they evinced a rising interest in Ibn Taymlya’s intel- 
lectual legacy (following its virtual eclipse by the mid- 14 th century 
with the rise to dominance of tasawwuf allied with Ash'ari theol- 
ogy), 184 and thus perhaps contributed to a re-emergence or revival of 
the salafi school from the late 17 th century. 185 In the 13 th /19 th century, 
the two al-Jundis, father and son, can finally be mentioned. The 
former was a follower of the shari 'a-minded reformist Naqshbandi 
Shaykh Khalid, who had called for returning to the Qur’an and 
Sunna, yet read the works of Ibn 'Arabi and felt a spiritual affinity 
with him. 186 Muhammad Amin al-Jundl the son was a reformist 'dlim 
in his own right and also a close associate of the Amir 'Abd al-Qadir 
(whose own reformist tendencies and shari 'a-minded, scripturalist 
sufism combined with a devotion to Ibn 'Arabi have been widely 
noted, and whose ulama followers launched the Salafi reform move- 
ment in Syria). 187 

The blending of sufi and salafi thought is thus illustrated by sev- 
eral of the figures associated with the prayer, both in pre-modern 
and modern periods. Within this blend, which itself became increas- 
ingly significant for later reformists or ‘revivalists’, it was salafism 
that came to prominence under the conditions and pressures of mo- 
dernity. 188 Were it possible to map the continuation of the chains 
discussed here across the 20 th century, it would be of interest to as- 
certain the orientations of new links in terms of this framework, 
and in particular to discover whether any who avail themselves of 
the prayer’s baraka can be counted as contemporary salafis, seeking 


49 


A Prayer across Time 


inspiration in Ibn Taymlya’s legacy . 189 A defining aspect in the self- 
appropriation of the ‘salafi’ banner in the modern world has of course 
been a powerful anti-sufism, in which Ibn 'Arabl’s legacy looms 
large. This is not the whole story, however. Through the inclusive 
tendencies of some of the most eminent historical figures of ' ilm and 
tasawwuf associated with it, this small prayer of Ibn 'Arab! points 
up with striking clarity the anomalous character of the uncompro- 
mising salafi-sufi dichotomy perpetuated in some contemporary 
Muslim circles. 


50 


Notes to Chapter 2 


Notes 


1. The Turkish collections offer what is arguably the most important manuscript 
base for the works of Ibn 'Arabl in general. We have supplemented the specific Suley- 
maniye collection, the largest by far, with copies front the following Turkish librar- 
ies: University of Istanbul Library Collection, Ulu Cami (Bursa), Genel (Inebey, 
Bursa), Beyazid (Istanbul), Mevlana Museum (Konya), Ankara Milli. Relating to the 
Suleymaniye collection, the following errors in Osman Yahya, Histoire et classification 
de Voeuvre d’Ibn ' Arabl (Damascus, 1964), 1, p.294 (RG 244) can be pointed out. 
Diigiimlu Baba 4146 and 4137 and Esad Efendi 4036 are unrecognisable numbers; 
Diigiimlii Baba 194, Haci Mahmud Efendi 461 and Esad Efendi 1330 are irrelevant. 
§ehid Ali Pa§a 2796 is a fragment of the Aivrad that sometimes appears described as 
Istighdtha but here is described as Hizb al-Shaykh al-Akbar. Note also that Ulu Cami 
954 (Bursa) is irrelevant. 

2. All of the copies surveyed here are thus relatively late. It may well be that ear- 
lier copies can be uncovered: Yahya, Histoire, 1, p.294 lists those in Damascus, Cairo, 
Rabat, Paris and Berlin not examined in this study and apparently undated. 

3. For details of four of these which have chains of transmission attached and a 
fifth without, see Appendix. The remaining two, both in Ottoman Turkish, are as 
follows: (i) 'All al-Wasfl b. Husayn al-Husaynl (Haci Mahmud Efendi 4217, detailed 
commentary on individual words and phrases fols. la-94a; the text of the prayer is 
repeated with further comments verse by verse fols. 99b-110a), dated AH 1261. (ii) 
Anonymous (Haci Re§id Bey 104), undated, 20 fols. For additional copies of some of 
the commentaries referred to here and further commentaries on the prayer held in 
collections outside of Turkey, see Yahya, Histoire, 1, pp.294-295. 

It has been suggested that the first sustained systematic commentary on a sufi 
prayer is that composed by Da’ud Ibn Bakhila (d.733/1332) on al-Shadhili’s Hizb al- 
bahr. See Richard J. A. McGregor, Sanctity and Sainthood in Medieval Egypt: The Wafa ’ 
Sufi Order and the Legacy of Ibn ' Arab J (Albany, NY, 2004), pp. 34-35. 

4. Other examples include Haci Mahmud Efendi 4141 (dated AH 1275), Yazma 
Bagiglar 2180 (undated and followed by a u nrd attributed to Abu Bakr b. 'Abdallah 
al-'Aydarus and an untitled anonymous supplication), A 5705 [University of Istanbul 
Library] (dated 1793 CE and followed by a prayer by Abu’l-Hasan al-Shadhill and a 
salaivdt attributed to Ibn 'Arabl: see below), A 4344 [University of Istanbul Library] 
(dated AH 1318, each line surrounded by a gold-leaf border, with only eight lines per 
page) and Nafiz Pa§a 702, on which see note 6 below. 

5. For example, I. Note that Ankara Milli 489 binds together the Daivr (as part of 
an undated hand) with works by Ibn 'Arabl (e.g. R. al-Alif Mashahid al-asrdr, K. al- 
Ba’) in several hands. 

6. Examples include G, K ( Salaivdt kubra), M, §azeli 106 ( Istighdtha , Aivrad, 
Salaivdt kubra), Esad Efendi 1330 ( Salat sharifa), A 5705 [University of Istanbul 


51 


A Prayer across Time 


Library] ( Salawdt sharTfa), Nafiz Pa§a 702 (an undated compilation of the Awrad and 
the Dawr), Genel 43 {Awrad dated AH 1179, copy made in Damascus) and Arif-Murad 
58 (printed, undated, encompassing th e Awrad). §azeli 106 encompasses the date AH 
1139. Esad Efendi 1330 is dated from AH 1194 to 1219. 

7 . For example, M. Note that Esad Efendi 1330 includes prayers by al-Nawawi, 
al-Shadhill and Ibn Mashlsh. Esad Efendi 267 (undated) encompasses a treatise on 
the names of the Prophet and one on the names of his Companions who were at Badr, 
plus a commentary on a prayer by al-Shadhill. §azeli 106 encompasses prayers by al- 
Shadhill, al-Nawawi, Najm al-Dln Kubra, al-Shafi'l, 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilanl, Ma'ruf 
Karkhl, Imam 'All and supplications of the prophets. L encompasses among others 
the protective prayer of Abu Madyan Shu'ayb. Genel 43 has Hizb al-nasr by al- 
Shadhill and others; Arif-Murad adds Hizb al-bahr of al-Shadhill, al-Salawdt al- 
munjiya and other short prayers. 

8. §azeli 157 (undated), for example, includes prayers and prayer-commentaries, 
poems and works by Isma' il Hakki Bursevi (including a commentary on the prayer of 
Ibn Mashlsh), Sari 'Abdullah Efendi (including Maslak al-'ushshdq) and Nawa'i 
Efendi (parts of a commentary on the Fusils al-hikam). 

9. Examples are J, F, and Haci Mahmud Efendi 6287 (possibly dated AH 1252), 
the latter by Muhammad 'Abd al-Jalll al-Mawsill al-Jlll. See also Beyazid 7880 (un- 
dated), Esad Efendi 3674 (possibly dated AH 1203 or before). 

10 . The copying of texts was often done out of a desire for benefit or baraka , 
out of love for the author, or as a means whereby the copyist endeavoured to bring 
themselves into the living or dead author’s presence. For examples relating to devo- 
tees of Ibn 'Arabl who copied his works after his death, see Michael Chamberlain, 
Knowledge and Social Practice in Medieval Damascus, 1190-1350 (Cambridge, 1994), 
p. 144. Some believed that copying had a talismanic power bringing spiritual benefit: 
Chamberlain cites the example of Ibn al-jawzl, who requested that after his death all 
the pens with which he had copied hadith should be gathered and heated in water, 
which was to be used to wash his corpse. Comparing 'ibn with prayer, some writers 
urged copyists to carry out their work only when in a state of ritual ablution. See ibid, 
p. 136. 

11. On the general notion of sanad, literally a support or stay, applied to the chain 
of authorities that validates transmitted knowledge, see ‘Sanad’, El 2 , Supplement 9- 
10, p. 702 (for the related term isndd [pi. asdnTd ] applied in the context of hadith trans- 
mission, see ‘Isnad’, El 2 , 4, p.207). In setting out their chains of transmission, some 
of our sources explicitly use the term sanad. Within the chains, some use the verbs 
akhadha 'an and rawd 'an (to take/transmit from) and others ajdza (to grant permis- 
sion, reflecting the fact that an ijdza underpins each link in a chain). 

12 . A seventh chain attached to the prayer (and th e. Awrad) is recorded in Yahya, 
Histoire, 2, p. 540 (no. 1, attached to RG 16a) and discussed in Ibn 'Arabl, The Seven 
Days of the Heart, pp. 174-175. While we do not discuss this chain here we would point 
to the fact that the transmitter from Ibn 'Arabl died in AH 727: this suggests a pos- 
sible ‘child ijdza’ (on which see below). G, apparently its original source, has been the 


52 


Notes to Chapter 2 

basis of a number of printings (Haci Mahmud Efendi 4179, Dugumlii Baba 490 and 
489, for example). 

13. Biographical notes provided here vary in length depending on how well 
known a figure is, the availability of information and the accessibility of sources: de- 
tail is provided when this is of interest or relevance to our focus and/or is not readily 
accessible to the non-Arabist. 

14. For a fascinating glimpse of the cultural and social context within which the 
significance and operation of the ijaza can be properly understood (as played out in 
late 12 th to mid-14 th century CE Damascus), see Chamberlain, Knowledge and Social 
Practice, ch. 4. The author points to the prestige attached to scholarly pedigrees in the 
form of chains of transmission, and the concern of the learned elite to emphasise 
them as an integral part of their strategies of social survival, advanced through 
cultural practices associated with knowledge. The same emphasis is reflected in the 
production of the mashyakha or mu' jam literature, a genre listing the shaykhs an in- 
dividual had studied with or heard hadith from. 

Of our chains, {A} and {E} are associated with an ijaza in which the transmitter 
grants permission to a specific individual to read the prayer, thus perpetuating the 
chain. Ijdzas addressed to a specific individual arise also in Haci Mahmud Efendi 4141 
(fob 9a, dated AH 1275) and in Esad Efendi 1442 (fol. 52a, undated). In the latter case 
it encompasses the Awrdd as well as the Dawr and is granted to Muhammad Rafl' 
Efendi by Muhammad 'Umar b. 'Abd al-Jalll al-Baghdadl, who describes himself as 
khadim ni'dl al-sdda al-Qadiriya, and has added the Dawr and ijaza at the end of this 
copy of K. al-Rashahdt al-anwarTya ft sharh al-awrad al-akbarTya : on the margin of the 
Awrdd, the latter is by Hasan al-Kurdl. According to Carl Brockelmann, Geschichte 
der arabischen litteratur (Leiden, 1943-49) [hereafter ‘GAL’], II, pp.453, 473, Hasan b. 
Musa al-Kurdl al-Qadirl al-Banl al-'Alawanl al-Jllanl al-Kuranl al-Naqshbandl 
(d. 1148/1735) also wrote Risdlafi qawl al-Shaykh al-Akbar wa qawl al-JilT and Risdlafi 
anna ' ilm Allah muhTt bi-nafsihi am Id. Yahya, Histoire, 1, p.289 records him as author 
of a commentary on Ibn 'Arabl’s K. al-Hikam (RG 233). 

15. See Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Maqqarl, Nafh al-tib min ghusn al-Andalus al- 
ratib, ed. Ihsan Abbas (Beirut, 1968), II, p. 170. For further biographical references, 
his inclusion in samd's and a discussion of the possible identity of his mother (Khatun 
Maryam bint Muhammad, known as Unim al-Jawban: Sa'd al-Dln was apparently 
also known as al-Jawban and 'Ala’ al-Dln), see Claude Addas, Quest for the Red Sul- 
phur: The Life of Ibn 'Arab! (Cambridge, 1993), pp.265 n. 118, 86-87, 228; Stephen 
Hirtenstein, The Unlimited Mercifier (Oxford, 1999), pp. 261-62 n.30; also p. 182. 

16. See Ahmad b. 'Abd al-Rahlm b. al-Husayn Ibn al-'Iraql, al-Dhayl 'aid al-' ibar 
fi khabar man 'abar, ed. Salih al-Mahdi 'Abbas (Beirut, 1989), 2, p. 527. On him see 
also 'Abd al-Hayy b. 'Abd al-Kabir al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris wa’l-athbdt wa mu' jam 
al-ma' djim wa’l-mashyakhdt wa’l-musalsaldt, ed. Ihsan 'Abbas (Beirut, 1982-86), p.431; 
Shams al-Dln al-Dhahabl, Dhayl ta’rikh al-Isldm, ed. Mazin b. Salim al-Bawazir 
(Riyadh, 1998), p.202. 

The Maqam Ibrahim is the (site of) the miraculous stone on which Ibrahim is 


53 


A Prayer across Time 


believed to have stood while building the Ka'ba, and which bears his footprints. 
Through the revelation of Q 2: 125, the Prophet established the site as a place of 
prayer (Ibrahim and Isma'll had reportedly prayed there when they had completed 
their work of building). In early Islam, the stone was encased in a wooden box and 
raised on a platform, usually locked inside the Ka'ba. Today it stands in a glass 
encasement about twenty cubits from the Ka'ba, and pilgrims perform two prayer 
cycles as close as possible behind it. See ‘Maqam Ibrahim’, El 2 , 6, pp. 104-107. 

17. On the family see Muhammad b. Fadlallah (Amin) al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al- 
atharfi a'yan al-qarn al-hadT 'ashar (Cairo, 1284), 2, pp. 461-462. 

18. See Ahmad Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl, al-Durar al-kdmina ft a'yan al-mi’a al- 
thdmina , ed. Muhammad Sayyid Jadd al-Haqq (Cairo, 1966), 1, p. 56. 

19. At times alongside his brother, al-Safl al-Tabari: for these examples, see Ibn 
al-'Iraql, al-Dhayl 'aid al-' ibar, index. See also al-'Asqalanl, al-Durar al-kdmina, 1, 
p. 56. 

It may appear that Radi al-Dln was born too late to have transmitted directly from 
Ibn 'Arabl (who died when he was four years old), but the possibility of such a link in 
the form of a ‘child ijdza’ (perhaps through the agency of his father or another male 
relative) cannot be ruled out: on such ijdzas see below. 

We must mention the possibility that instead of the figure identified here, Radi 
al-Dln al-Tabari might be the Shafi'i mufti and member of the same family Ahmad 
b. 'Abdallah al-Tabari al-Makkl (d.694) listed by Yahya, Histoire, 1, p. 133 as a de- 
fender of Ibn 'Arabl. There is no evidence that the latter was known as Radi al-Dln/ 
al-Radl, however. Other members of the important al-Tabari al-Makkl family appear 
later in chain {D}. 

It is noteworthy that Ibn 'Arabl had encountered the previous imam of the Maqam 
Ibrahim during a visit to Mecca in AH 598, in the person of the father of Nizam, 
Shaykh Abu Shuja' Zahir b. Rustam al-Isfahanl (d. 609/1212), from whom he received 
an ijdza for Tirmidhl’s collection of hadith. See Addas, Quest for the Red Sulphur, 
pp. 209-210; Ibn al- 'Arabl, The Tarjumdn al-Ashvodq, ed. Reynold A. Nicholson (Lon- 
don, 1978), p. 3. 

20. See ‘Ibn 'Asakir’, El 2 , 3, pp. 713-715. Ibn 'Arabl himself listed another figure 
called al-Qasimlbn 'Asakir among his own hadith instructors, who died in 600/1203. 
See Alexander Knysh, Ibn ‘ Arab T in the Later Islamic Tradition: The Making of a Polemical 
Image in Medieval Islam (Albany, NY, 1999), p. 334 n. 118. 

21. Yahya, Histoire, RG 484. See A3320 [University of Istanbul Library], fob 17a. 
Note that this ijdza including Ibn 'Asakir is not recorded in Histoire, 2, p.393. The 
same work arises in Halet Efendi 245, where it appears under a different title, R. al- 
Huruf biTmanzumdt: fol. 260b records him transmitting the work through an ijdza 
from Ibn 'Arabl, and fob 271a records him receiving an ijdza for it from Ibn 'Arabl 
and from his son 'Imad al-Dln. 

22. See Yahya, Histoire, 2, p. 540, chain 6b. 

23. See Esad Efendi 1413, frontispiece. The author thanks Stephen Hirtenstein 
for this and manuscript information above relating to Ibn 'Asakir. 


54 


Notes to Chapter 2 

24 . See al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 221: see also p. 581. 

25 . On him see El 2 , 2, p.292; Georges Vajda, ed., Le Dictionnaire des autorites de 
Abd al-Mu’min al-Dimyati (Paris, 1962). For a list of his writings, see Brockelmann, 
GAL, II, p. 88; Sup. II, p. 79. 

26 . See Vajda, ed., Le Dictionnaire des autorites, p. 12. 

27 . Ibid., p. 123. He does not appear in the index of samd's, however. 

28 . See Yahya, Histoire, 2, p. 540, chains 6c and d. 

29 . See Addas, Quest for the Red Sulphur, p. 320. 

30 . Such as Ibn 'Abd al-Ghanl al-MaqdisI: see al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 645 ; 
also pp.638, 997. 

31 . For examples of his students, teaching and transmissions, see al-Dhahabl, 
Dhayl ta’rikh al-lsldm, pp. 152, 409, 455, 369; al-'Asqalanl, al-Durar al-kdmina, 3, 

p. 163. 

32 . The full name given here follows that in Ibn al-'Iraql, al-Dhayl' aid al-' ibar, 2, 
p.492: the author also spells the name al-HarrawI, while all other sources do not 
double the r (we follow this majority position here). 'Abd al-Hayy Ibn al-'Imad, 
Shadharat al-dhahab ft akhbdr man dhahab (Cairo, 1351), 6, p.272 gives as his full 
name Nasir al-Dln Muhammad b. Yusuf b. 'All b. Idris al-HarawI {al-Tabardar}. Al- 
'Asqalanl, al-Durar al-kdmina, 4, p.216 gives it as Muhammad b. 'All b. Yusuf b. Idris 
al-Dimyati al-HarawI {Nasir al-Dln al-Tabardar}. None of these refer to hint as ‘Abu 
Talha’ or as ‘al-Zahid’. Al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 319 mentions ‘Abu Talha al- 
Harawl al-Zahid’ and p. 549 Muhammad b. 'All b. Yusuf al-HarawI (Nasir al-Dln), 
evidently the same person. Note that the name is spelled differently in all three 
appearances in chains in Yahya, Histoire, 2, pp. 540-541 (as Talha al-HarrawI, Abu 
Talha al-KharrawI, and Abu Talha al-HarrawI). 

33 . For the former see Ibn al-' Iraqi, al-Dhayl 'ala al-' ibar, 2, p.492 and Ibn al- 
'Imad, Shadharat al-dhahab, 6, p.272. For the latter see al-'Asqalanl, al-Durar al- 
kdmina, 4, p. 216. 

34 . See Ibn al-'Iraql, al-Dhayl ' aid al-' ibar, 2, pp. 492-493 ; Ibn al-'Imad, Shadharat 
al-dhahab, 6, p.272. 

35 . See al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, pp. 319 and 549. This gives, respectively, Abu 
Talha al-HarawI al-Zahid and Muhammad b. 'All b. Yusuf al-HarawI transmitting 
(p. 319 Ibn 'Arabl’s works specifically) from Sharaf al-Dln al-Dimyati, and to 
Muhammad b. Muqbil al-Halabl. 

36. Al-'Asqalanl, al-Durar al-kdmina, 1, p. 11 gives his full name as Ibrahim b. 
Ahmad b. 'Abd al-Wahid b. 'Abd al-Mu’min b. Sa'ld b. Kamil b. 'Alwan al-Tanukhl. 

37 . In each case al-'Asqalanl describes his contribution through the expression 
takhrij. In relation to works of hadith this typically means ‘to quote, publish or give 
the isnad’ of a hadith. (It may also indicate ‘bringing out’ the implications of hadith for 
the rules of fiqh, encompassing an explanation of use and shortness of associated chains 
of transmission, and making for easy identification of hadith relevant to specific sub- 
jects.) See Roy Mottahedeh, Review of Richard W. Bulliet, The Patricians ofNishapur 
(Cambridge, MA, 1972), Journal of the American Oriental Society 95: 3 (1975), p.492. 


55 


A Prayer across Time 


38 . See further al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, pp. 220-222, 1014, index; al-'Asqalanl, 
al-Durar al-kdmina, 1, pp. 11-12. 

39 . On him see Knysh, Ilm ArabT, pp. 226, 237; idem, ‘Ibn 'Arab! in the Yemen: 
His Admirers and Detractors’, JMIAS XI (1992), pp.44 ff; for detailed sources dis- 
cussing his biography and work, p. 59 n. 35. 

40 . See al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, pp. 553, 110-111. The name al-Murshidl may 
refer to one of his ancestors or Munyat Rashid, an Egyptian village. Note the appear- 
ance of al-Murshidl in a chain relating to the Hizb of al-Nawawi: p. 1144. 

41 . On him see El 2 , 3, pp. 776-778. 

42 . Knysh, Ibn ArabT, pp.26, 135. 

43 . Ibid., pp. 128-129; see also chs. 5, 8; idem, Ibn 'Arabl in the Later Islamic 
Tradition, in S. Hirtenstein and M. Tiernan, eds., Muhytddin Ibn ArabT: A Com- 
memorative Volume (Shaftesbury, 1993), pp. 308, 313. Similarly, Yahya, Histoire, 1, 
pp. 130, 134 includes Ibn Hajar both among the mufti defenders and opponents of 
Ibn 'Arabl. 

44 . See Basheer M. Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform in Pre-Modern Islamic Cul- 
ture: In Search of Ibrahim al-Kurani’, Die Welt des lslams 42: 3 (2002), p. 329. Cf. 
idem, ‘Abu al-Thana’ al-Alusi: An 'Alim, Ottoman Mufti, and Exegetist of the 
Qur’an’, IJMES 34 (2002), p.466. 

By the term salafi we refer here to a view of Islam shaped by the defining principles 
of the legacy of Ahmad Ibn Taymlya (d.1328), whose vision of Islam represented an 
attempt to restore the pristine faith as understood and practised by the salaf al-sdlih 
or righteous forefathers of the Islamic community. These principles served to rein- 
state the ultimate authority of the original Islamic texts against the accumulated 
Islamic tradition, to protect tawhTd, uphold the absence of contradiction between 
revelation and reason, and establish the unity of the community. Ibn Taymlya’s call 
to return to a direct understanding of the Qur’an and hadith was in opposition to the 
invocation of Greek philosophical concepts/tools by Ash'ari and Mu'tazili theologi- 
cal schools (which threatened to undermine the proper relationship of reason to rev- 
elation). It was also set against unreserved following of the opinions of the madhahib 
(legal school) founders through taqlTd. He rejected sectarian and madhhab-based divi- 
sions and denounced the excesses of popular tasawwuf and the doctrine of wahdat al- 
wujud for its threatened undermining of tawhTd and divine transcendence. Given its 
reformist thrust, this legacy was eventually to become a major source of inspiration 
for those Sunni ulama who sought to challenge the dominant culture of Ash'arism 
and to reform aspects of sufi belief and practice. For a concise introduction to Ibn 
Taymlya’s thought and legacy, see Itzchak Weismann, Taste of Modernity: Sufism, 
Salafiyya and Arabism in Late Ottoman Damascus (Leiden, 2001), pp. 263-268. See fur- 
ther Henri Laoust, Essai stir les doctrines sociales et politiques de Taki al-Din Ahmad b. 
Taimiya (Cairo, 1939). 

45 . Al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, pp. 319, 554. 

46 . Ibid., pp.617, 554. 

47 . On Hanbali faqTh al-Fakhr Ibn al-Bukharl (Abu’l-Hasan 'All b. Ahmad b. 

56 


Notes to Chapter 2 

'Abd al-Wahid al-MaqdisI, AH 596-690), see ibid., pp. 633-634. On his importance 
as a hadith transmitter by virtue of his ‘high’ chain, see pp. 588, 947, 1013. 

48. See for example ibid., p. 991. 

49. Ibid., p. 549. For further accounts of Muhammad b. Muqbil transmitting to 
al-Suyuti, see pp. 627, 634. 

50. On the father see ibid., p. 270. 

51. Ibid., p. 910 ff. 

52. Ibid., pp. 617, 911. 

53. Ibid., pp. 110-111, 669. 

54. Ibid., p. 669; al-TaysTr bi-tardjim al-Tabartym is also known as al-Tabytn ft 
tardjim al-I'abariyin : see al-Muhibbl, Khulasat al-athar, 2, p.457. 

55. On him see El 2 , 9, pp. 913-916; for details concerning his contribution to the 
late 9 th -century AH debate concerning Ibn 'Arabl’s teachings see Knysh, Ibn Arab i, 
pp. 79-81, 119-120, 213, 223. Yahya, Histoire, 1, p. 134 lists hint among the defenders 
of Ibn 'Arab!. See also Knysh, Ibn 'Arab! in the Later Islamic Tradition, pp. 312, 
316-317. 

56. Al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 1014. 

57. See also ibid. p. 853. 

58. Ibid., pp. 755-756. 

59. See ibid., pp. 619, 755. 

60. Ibid., pp. 755-756, 677, 684. 

61. See ibid. pp. 756, 1125, 853, also 958-959. 

62. See Najm al-Din al-GhazzI, al-Kaivdkib al-sa'ira bi-a'ydn al-mi’a al-dshira , ed. 
Jibrail S. Jabbur (Harissa, Lebanon, 1959), 1, pp. 197-198. 

63. See Michael Winter, Society and Religion in Early Ottoman Egypt: Studies in the 
Writings of Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha' rani (New Brunswick, NJ, 1982), pp. 54-55; El 2 , 
11, p.406. For autobiographical accounts transmitted from Zakarlya al-Ansarl to al- 
Sha'rani and other accounts related by al-Sha'ranl concerning him, see for example 
al-GhazzI, al-Kaivdkib al-sa’ ira, 1, pp. 196-198, 200-201. His early reputation for a 
love of the sufis, for attending their dhikr sessions and studying their works, had led 
his peers to suggest that he would be ‘no use’ as a faqih: when he went on to excel in 
the exoteric sciences, some of them became jealous. See ibid., pp. 198, 200. 

64. See al-Ghazzi, al-Kawakib al-sa'ira, 1, p.202. 

65. See ibid., pp. 203-204 (as al-Ghazzi puts it, ‘He understood through dhawq 
{spiritual ‘taste’} the words of the folk, and would explain what the people of the way 
said in the most perfect way, providing excellent answers concerning this if part of it 
appeared ambiguous to people.’); Knysh, Ibn Arab T, p. 212; Th. Emil Homerin, From 
Arab Poet to Muslim Saint: Ibn al-Farid, His Verse and His Shrine (Columbia, SC, 1994), 
pp. 69-73; Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 163-164. Yahya, Histoire, 1, p. 134 lists him 
among the defenders of Ibn 'Arab!. 

66. See al-Ghazzi, al-Kaivakib al-sa' ira, 1, p. 199. 

67. Ibid, p. 202. 

68. Al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 319. 


57 


A Prayer across Time 


69. Also spelled Sha'rawi: see Brockelmann, GAL, II, p.441. 

70 . See for example Knysh, Ibn 'Arabl in the Later Islamic Tradition, p. 311; 
Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 165-172. The ‘deliberate interpolation’ hypothesis 
was a historical stratagem used in Islamic culture to deal with difficulties presented 
by certain texts front the perspective of ‘orthodoxy’. It was used to exonerate Ibn 
'Arabl, for example, by casting doubt on the attribution of the Fusils al-hikam to hint 
in its extant form, on the grounds that specific problematic statements had been 
inserted into the text. 

71 . Winter, Society and Religion, p. 55. 

72. See El 2 , 9, p. 316. On him see further Winter, Society and Religion. 

73 . See for example David Commins, Islamic Reform: Politics and Social Change in 
Late Ottoman Syria (New York and Oxford, 1990), p. 50; for his attitude towards the 
madhahib and madhhab affiliation see Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 224, 236-241. 

74 . See Nafi, ‘Abu al-Thana’ al-Alusi’, p.489 n. 7. 

75 . See Winter, Society and Religion, p. 57; al-GhazzI, al-Kawdkib al-sd’ira, 1, 
pp. 97-98. 

76. Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 99, 139-140. This was the only one of his 
many shaykhs to give him such authorisation. Al-Sha'ranI expressly referred to al- 
Shinnawi as al-Ahmadl. Several of his other shaykhs were also Ahmadls, associated 
with the Ahmadiyya, ‘the order of Ahmad al-Badawl’: ibid., p.98. More commonly 
known as the Badawiyya, this is characterised by a popular cult centred on al-Badawl, 
his mawlid and his tomb in Tanta, Egypt. For al-Sha'rani’s accounts of al-Shinnawi 
conversing with al-Badawl at the latter’s tomb see al-GhazzI, al-Kawdkib al-sd’ira, 1, 
p.98. 

77. Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 99, 138. 

78 . This was Abu’l-Fath Muhammad al-Iskandarl al-MazzI. The account here 
draws on al-GhazzI, al-Kawdkib al-sd’ira, 3, pp. 3-10. 

79. See Barbara Rosenow von Schlegell, Sufism in the Otto?nan Arab World: Shaykh 
Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1143/1731), PhD thesis, University of California, Berke- 
ley, 1997, p.29. 

80. See Brockelmann, GAL, II, p. 514. 

81 . See al-Muhibbi, Khuldsat al-athar, 1, p.244; Martin van Bruinessen, ‘Origins 
and Development of the Sufi Orders ( tarekat ) in Southeast Asia’, Studia Islamika 
(Jakarta) 1: 1 (1994); idem, ‘Shari'a Court, Tarekat and Pesantren: Religious Institu- 
tions in the Sultanate of Banten’, Archipel 50 (1995), p. 179. On Sibghatallah 
(d. 1015/1606-07), see Atallah S. Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya and its Offshoot, the 
Naqshbandiyya-Mujaddidiyya in the Haramayn in the ll lh /17 lh Century’, Die Welt des 
Islams 43: 3 (2003), p. 323 . He had received Ibn 'Arabi’s doctrine (which he propa- 
gated in the Haramayn) from his shaykh Wajlh al-Dln al-'AlawI (d.1609), an 
‘outstanding advocate’ of Ibn 'Arab! and his doctrine in India. See further Khaled 
El-Rouayheb, ‘Opening the Gate of Verification: The Forgotten Arab-Islamic Flo- 
rescence of the 17th Century’, IJMES 38 (2006), pp.271; 247 n.51. 


58 


Notes to Chapter 2 

82. See John O. Voll, “'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri and 18 th Century Hadith 
Scholarship’, Die Welt des lslams 42 : 3 (2002), p. 367. 

83 . See Brockelmann, GAL, II, p. 514. He also wrote Risdla fi wahdat al-wujud\ 
see al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al-athar, 1, p.244. 

84 . This paragraph is based on al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al-athar, 2, pp. 457-464. 

85 . On his teachers see Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar wa qatf al-thamar 
min tarajim a'ydn al-tahaqa al-fild min al-qarn al-hadi 'ashar, ed. Mahmud al-Shaykh 
(Damascus, 1981), 1, pp. 31-36. Particular mention should be made of his shaykh 
Shihab al-Dln Ahmad b. Yunus al-'lthawl, Shaft' i mufti. 

86. See 'Abd al-Razzaq al-Bitar, Hilyat al-basharft ta’rikh al-qarn al-thdlith 'ashar 
(Beirut, 1993/1961), 1, p. 153; al-GhazzI, al-Kawdkib al-sd’ ira, 1, pp.xi-xxi. For fur- 
ther details of his posts see al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar, 1, pp. 45-55. 

87 . See al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar, 1, p.97. 

88. See von Schlegell, Sufistn, pp.32, 43, 78; Zuhayr Khalil al-Burqawi, 'Abd al- 
GhanT al-NdlmlusT wa tasawwufuhu (Amman, 2003), p.95. 

89 . Al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar, 1, p.96; Muhammad Khalil b. 'All al-Muradl, Silk 
al-durar fi a'ydn al-qarn al-thdni 'ashar (Cairo, 1301), 1, p. 5 ; Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and 
Reform’, p. 321. 

90 . For his works in this field see al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar, 1, pp. 108-111. 

91 . See al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al-athar, 4, p. 199. 

92 . Ibid., p. 200; see also al-GhazzI, Lutf al-samar, 1, p.84. 

93 . John O. Voll, ‘Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi and Muhammad Ibn 'Abd al- 
Wahhab: An Analysis of an Intellectual Group in Eighteenth-century Madina’, Bul- 
letin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 38: 1 (1975), pp. 32-33 indicates 
something of al-Qushashl’s importance to 18 th -century Medinan ulama circles based 
on intellectual lineages among them leading back to him. 

94 . See ibid., p.34. Editor of the six major Sunni collections of hadith and de- 
scribed by al-Jabartl as ‘the seal of hadith scholars’, al-Basri was a teacher of 
Muhammad Hayat al-Sindi. On him see Voll, “'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, pp. 356— 
372. 

95. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, pp. 312-320. 

96. Al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al-athar, 1, p. 345. 

97 . See El 2 , 5, pp. 525-526. On Singkel see below. Note that al-Qushashl was 
centrally involved in the polemic engaged with Sirhindl’s khalifa Adam al-Banurl 
during meetings in Medina on specific points of doctrine as interpreted by Adam. See 
Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya’, pp. 332-337. 

98 . Michel Chodkiewicz, Seal of the Saints: Prophethood and Sainthood in the 
Doctrine of Ibn ’ Arab i (Cambridge, 1993), pp. 135-136; al-Muhibbl, Khuldsat al-athar, 
1, p. 345. 

99 . 'mazj al-haqd'iq bi’l-ahadith al-nabawiya’ as described in al-Kattani, Fihris 
al-fahdris, p.971. 

100 . See Voll, “'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, p. 368. 


59 


A Prayer across Time 


101 . See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, p. 314 (and for further detailed sources on 
al-Qushashl, see p. 312 n. 10-13); cf. al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis , p. 971. 

102 . Al-Muhibbl, Khulasat al-athar, 2, pp. 195-196. Voll, ‘Muhammad Hayya al- 
Sindi’, p. 33 n. 8 mentions him in passing among a group of teachers in 18 th -century 
Medina. His brother 'All (d. 1070/1659-60) was imam and Hanafi mufti at the Haram 
(Sanctuary) in Mecca. See Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya’, pp. 330-331. 

103 . See al-Muhibbl, Khulasat al-athar, 1, p.345. 

104 . For a detailed overview of his education, see Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, 
pp. 321 ff. 

105 . Voll, ‘Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi’, p. 34. 

106 . See Alexander Knysh, ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani (d. 1101/1690), An Apologist for 
wahdat al-wujud’, JRAS Series 3, 5: 1 (1999), p. 46. 

107 . Martin van Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama and their Indonesian Disciples’, at 
http://www.let.uu.nl/~martin.vanbruinessen/personal/publications/Kurdish_ 
ulama_Indonesia.htm, 20pp: pp.4-5. On his stature see further El-Rouayheb, ‘Open- 
ing the Gate’, p.274. 

108 . Knysh, ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani’, p.45. Van Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama’, p.5 
describes the mature al-Kurani as ‘the leading representative of Ibn 'Arabl’s doc- 
trines in Medina and perhaps throughout the entire Muslim world.’ 

109 . Singkel became particularly close to al-Kurani, who gave him an ijdza to 
teach the Shattariyya tarTqa. He was the first to introduce the tarTqa to Indonesia, 
establishing it there as a moderate force as part of a broader reconciliation of mystics 
and legalists, and was thus a major influence on the revival of orthodox sufism, 
combined with shari 'a, in Sumatra. See van Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama’, p.4; Voll, 
Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi’, p. 39; idem, ‘'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, p. 370; 
Anthonyjohns, Islam in Southeast Asia: Problems and Perspectives, in C. D. Cowan 
and O. W. Walters, eds., Southeast Asian History and Historiography: Essays Presented to 
D. G. E. Hall (Ithaca, NY, 1976), pp. 314-319. 

110 . Van Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama’, p.5; Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, 
pp. 334 ff. On al-Kuranl’s role in transmitting hadith via the Yemeni Mizjaji family, 
see John O. Voll, Linking Groups in the Networks of Eighteenth Century Revivalist 
Scholars: The Mizjaji Family in Yemen, in Nehemia Levtzion and John O. Voll, eds., 
Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Reforjn (Syracuse, NY, 1987), p. 76. 

111 . Al-Kurani responded himself and also asked his student Muhammad b. 'Abd 
al-Rasul al-Barzanjl to respond. The latter wrote two treatises (dated 1682 and 1683) 
severely criticising Sirhindl: these were endorsed by leading ulama of the Hijaz, who 
agreed unanimously that Sirhindl’s ideas amounted to serious deviation. (It is un- 
likely, however, that al-Kurani would have agreed that Sirhindl be labelled an unbe- 
liever \kafir\: see Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya’, pp. 338-345, which also illuminates 
the political context of the Indian request for a fatwa, and the interests of the Sharif 
of Mecca in his relations with the Mughal ruler.) Many more works of the same kind 
appear to have been written in the context of this controversy over Sirhindl’s views: 
see further Yohanan Freidmann, Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi: Ati Outline of his Thought 


6o 


Notes to Chapter 2 

and a Study of his Image in the Eyes of Posterity (Montreal and London, 1971), pp. 7-8, 
96-97; Athar Abbas Rizvi, A History of Sufism in India, II (New Delhi, 1983); van 
Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama’, p. 5. 

On Sirhindl, who projected himself as the renovator of the second millennium and 
sought to replace the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud with that of wahdat al-shuhud, 
mounting a comprehensive reformist challenge to the tarjqas aimed at reconciling 
tasawwuf with the shari 'a and reinstating the centrality of the Sunna, see further 
Muhammad Abdul Haq Ansari, Sufism and Shari' ah: A Study of Shaykh Ahmad Sirhin- 
di’s Efforts to Reform Sufism (Leicester, 1986). 

Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, pp. 324-235, 247 points out that when al-Kuranl 
joined the Naqshbandiyya through al-Qushashi this was not through the Sirhindl 
line: later in his career, however, his students were initiated through this line. 

112 . See Basheer M. Nafi, ‘He was a Teacher of Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab: Muham- 
mad Hayat al-Sindi and the Revival of the Traditionist Methodology’, unpublished 
paper. Voll, “Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, p. 366 suggests that his approach to hadith 
studies formed part of an emergent, more textualist, mode. Note also that al-Kuranl 
was a teacher of 'Abdallah b. Salim al-Basri in hadith instruction: see ibid. pp. 364- 
365. On the interest in hadith scholarship among ulama with strong sufi affiliations 
in the 17 th and 18 th centuries, see John O. Voll, ‘Hadith Scholars and Tariqahs: An 
Ulama Group in the 18 th Century Haramayn and their Impact in the Islamic World’, 
Journal of Asian and African Studies XV: 3-4 (1980), pp.264-272. 

113 . See for example El 2 , 5, p.433; Knysh, ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani’, p.42. 

114 . As Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’ pp. 323-324 points out, al-Kuranl’s view of 
Ibn Taymlya was positively influenced by his main Damascene teacher, Hanbali 
mufti and the most eminent Hanbali 'dlim in Damascus at the time, 'Abd al-Baql TaqI 
al-Din b. Mawahib al-Hanball (d. 1070/1660). See also idem, ‘He was a Teacher’. 

In relation to issues of kaldm and late Ash'arism, Nafi surveys al-Kuranl’s treat- 
ment of such questions as the Qur’an and the divine speech, the attributes of God, 
and the concept of kasb (acquisition of actions), pointing out where he parted com- 
pany with late Ash 'ari dogma and declared his adherence to the salafi position, at the 
same time serving the end of rehabilitating the latter in dominant sufi-Ash'ari cir- 
cles. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, pp. 330-334, 339-342. He suggests that, in 
rejecting corporeity, anthropomorphism and allegorical interpretation, al-Kuranl ef- 
fectively constructed ‘a salafi foundation for Sufism’. See ibid. p. 337. For details of 
al-Kurani’s views on wahdat al-wujud, which amount to ‘an attempt to legitimate [it] 
not only in the eyes of the strict Muslim but even in the eyes of the. . .salafi’, see ibid, 
pp. 337-338. 

It is noteworthy that 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI disagreed profoundly with al- 
Kuranl’s (strongly salafi) view regarding the issue of kasb : see von Schlegell, Sufism, 
p. 19 n. 51. For other reactions to his views on free will, see El-Rouayheb, ‘Opening 
the Gate’, p. 281 n. 86. 

Note finally an ijdza and advice front al-Kuranl addressed to specific individuals 
(dated AH 1095 and 1096, respectively) concerning their perusal of Ibn 'Arabi’s works 


6i 


A Prayer across Time 


and the issue of reading these with/to others. He clarifies the attitude and approach 
appropriate to a beneficial and blessed reading and discussion of Ibn 'Arabl’s words 
(viz., bi-shart al-Tman bi’l-mutashabihat ma'a laysa kamithlihi shay’), warning that hold- 
ing rigidly to the belief of the theologians ( mutakallimun ) in such reading will be 
fruitless. Thus, if they find someone with the right attitude ( idha ra’aytutn ahadan 
yu’min bi’l-mutashabihat al-qur’antya wa’l-tanzih) , then it is fine to read with him. See 
A 3239 [University of Istanbul Library], fol. 151a. 

115. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, pp. 342, 350. 

116. On his relationship with al-Nabulusi, see 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusT, al- 
HaqTqa iwaTmajaz ft rihlatbildd al-Shdm wa Misr wa’l-Hijdz, ed. Riyad 'Abd al-Hamid 
Murad (Damascus, 1989), p.324 ff. 

117. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, pp. 346-347; al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, 

pp.216-218. 

118. His Dhakha’ir al-mawdrith fi’l-dalala 'ala mawddi' al-ahadlth set out all the 
books of sound hadith collections by the first transmitters’ names: see von Schlegell, 
Sufism, p. 3. 

119. Ibid., p.49. 

120. See ibid., chs. 2-4. For further detail on al-Nabulusi, see Elizabeth Sirreyeh, 
Sufi Visionary of Damascus: 'Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi, 1641-1731 (London and New 
York, 2005); Bakri Aladdin, Abdalghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1143/1731): oeuvre, vie et doc- 
trine, 2 vols., PhD thesis, University of Paris I, 1985; al-Burqawi, Abd al-Gham al- 
NdbulusT wa tasawwufuhu ; El 2 , 1, p. 60. 

121. See von Schlegell, Sufism, pp.33, 43, 250-251. Al-Nabulusi explicitly men- 
tioned in relation to al-Futuhdt al-MakkJya that he had inner ( bdtim ) paths of trans- 
mission which he could not make public. 

122. See ibid., p. 8. 

123. See Voll, ‘'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, pp. 363, 369. 

124. For further detail see al-Kattani, Fih?is al-fahdris, pp. 495-496; al-Bitar, 
Hilyat al-bashar, 2, p . 715; al-Muradi, Silk al-durar, 4, p.27; Voll, ‘Muhammad Hayya 
al-Sindi’, pp.33, 39; Knysh, ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani’, p.46. 

125. On hint see Nafi, ‘He was a Teacher’; Voll, ‘Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi’. 

126. See Aziz Ahmad, ‘Political and Religious Ideas of Shah Wali-ullah of Delhi’, 
The Muslim World LII: 1 (1962), p.22; J. M. S. Baljon, Religion and Thought of Shah 
Wall Allah, 1702-1762 (Leiden, 1986), pp.5-6; Hafiz A. Ghaffar Khan, ‘Shah Wali 
Allah: On the Nature, Origin, Definition and Classification of Knowledge’, Journal 
of Islamic Studies 3: 2 (1992), pp. 203-213; Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, p. 344. 

A third student was the leading Naqshbandi shaykh in Medina, Isma'll b. 'Abdal- 
lah al-Uskudarl (d. 1182/1768-69). See Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya’, p.345. 

127. See al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, p.497. 

128. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, p. 347. 

129. See El 2 , 1, pp. 965-966; Voll, ‘'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri’, p. 369; von 
Schlegell, Sufism, pp. 55-58, 128, 277. Frederick De Jong, Mustafa Kanial al-Din al- 
Bakri (1688-1749): Revival and Reform of the Khalwatiyya Tradition? in Levtzion 


62 


Notes to Chapter 2 

and Voll, eds., Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Reform, pp. 117-132 revisits 
earlier projections of al-Bakrl inspiring a Khalwati revival in the 18 th century and 
reforming the Khalwati way. For another view, see B. G. Martin, A Short History of 
the Khalwatiyya Order of Dervishes, in N. Keddie, ed., Scholars, Saints and Sufis: 
Muslim Religious Institutions since 1500 (Berkeley, CA, 1972), pp. 275-305. 

130 . Al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, pp. 100-102. See further index. 

131 . Note that in chain {B} ‘al-Hanafl’ is a misreading of al-Hifni by the copyist. 
The same copyist misreads al-Bakrl as al-Kubra. 

132 . On al-HifnawI see 'Abd al-Rahman al-Jabartl, 'Ajd' ih al-dthdr fi'l-tardjim 
wa’l-akhbdr (Beirut, n.d.), 1, pp. 339-354; de Jong, Mustafa Karnal al-Din al-Bakri, 
pp. 118, 120, 126-7. For his writings see al-Muradl, Silk al-durar, 4, p.49. For further 
sources on him, see Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, p. 347 n. 121. Note that al-HifnawT 
had himself assumed the position of Shaykh al-Azhar from 1757/58 until his death in 
1767. 

Al-Dardayr introduced certain changes to the litany of the Khalwati tartqa, incor- 
porating into this his Salawdt and Manzuma (see ch. 1 n. 4). These changes were re- 
tained by most of the tartqa branches that emerged later. See de Jong, Mustafa Kamal 
al-Din al-Bakri, pp. 127, 132 n.82. 

133 . Brockelmann, GAL, II, p.436. 

134 . Al-Muradl, Silk al-durar, 4, p. 102. The Wadi Tafilat in the southeast region 
of Morocco was the centre of the Kharijite emirate centred on Sijilmassa (8 th -9“ 
centuries CE). The Idrisid dynasty originated from this region. 

135 . See ibid., pp. 102-108. For further sources, see al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, 
pp. 268-269. 

136 . B; A 4305 [University of Istanbul Library] is another copy (40 fols.) appar- 
ently dated AH 1273. 

137 . Brockelmann, GAL, II, p.436; see also I, p.580. For further details of his 
works, see al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, pp. 268-269. 

138 . For example, al-Kuzbarl al-Wasit [Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Rahman], son of 
the foremost hadith scholar in the Syrian Ottoman provinces (d. AH 1221). He also 
appears in the thabat (list of authorities) ofMahmud Hamza al-Husaynl (d.1305). See 
al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, pp. 485, 880. 

139 . On him see al-Jabartl, Ajd’ib al-dthdr, 1, pp. 553-558; 348, drawn on here. 

140 . De Jong, Mustafa Kamal al-Din al-Bakri, p. 117; von Schlegell, Sufism, pp. 57 
n. 157; 277. 

141 . See al-Muradl, Silk al-durar, 4, pp. 14-15. 

142. Brockelmann, GAL, Sup. II, p.479. 

143 . Son of an important notable family of Damascus. 

144 . C, fols. 2b-3a. 

145 . Brockelmann, GAL, Sup. II, p.474. 

146 . Al-Bitar , Hilyat al-bashar, 1, p. 3. 

147 . See von Schlegell, Sufism, pp. 36 ff. 


63 


A Prayer across Time 


148 . See Ahmad al-Budayrl al-Hallaq, Hawadith Dimashq al-yavmnya, 1154- 
1175/1741-1762, ed. Ahmad 'Izzat 'Abd al-Karim (Damascus, 1959), p.52. 

149 . See Yahya, Histoire, 2, pp. 540-541. 

150 . On Muhammad al-Jundl see al-Bitar, Hilyat al-bashar, 1, pp. 349-350; 
Weismann, Taste of Modernity, p.61. 

Khalid al-Naqshbandl (1776-1826) was born in Shahrazur in northern Iraq. He 
studied there, in Damascus and the Hijaz and travelled to Delhi, where he studied 
with the leading Naqshbandi master, who gave hint an ijaza and an instruction to 
spread the tarlqa in the Ottoman lands. His successes in this during the first part of 
the 19 th century (he appointed at least 67 khalifas among Kurds, Turks and Arabs) 
were such that the line he initiated became known as the Naqshbandiyya-Khalidiyya 
(or Mujaddidiyya-Khalidiyya). He lived consecutively in Sulaymaniyya, Baghdad 
and Damascus. On him see Albert H. Hourani, Sufism and Modern Islam: Mawlana 
Khalid and the Naqshbandi Order, in Hourani, ed., The Emergence of the Modern 
Middle East (London, 1981), pp. 75-89; Weismann, Taste of Modernity, chs. 1-2; van 
Bruinessen, ‘Kurdish 'Ulama’, pp. 9-10; Butrus Abu-Manneh, ‘Salafiyya and the Rise 
of the Khalidiyya in Baghdad in the Early Nineteenth Century’, Die Welt des lslams 
43:3 (2003), pp. 364-367. 

151 . In chain {A} Amin al-Jundl refers to his father simply as Muhammad Efendi 
al-Jundl, while his note at the end of the commentary identifies his father as 
‘Muhammad Sa'ld Efendi min saldlat Al Ramadan b. al-hajj Ishaq Efendi al-muftl fl 
madlnat Atana [al-Astana?] fl-ma mada min al-zaman.’ (A, fol. 52a) He also signs 
himself in the same place as ‘Jundl Zade Muhammad Amin al- 'Abbas al-muftl bi- 
Dimashq’. Al-Bitar, Hilyat al-bashar, 1, p. 343 confirms Amin’s descent from al-'Abbas, 
the Prophet’s uncle, and includes in his full name a mention of Ishaq thus: Amin 
Efendi b. Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Wahhab b. Ishaq b. 'Abd al-Rahman b. Hasan b. 
Muhammad al-Jundl al-Ma'arrl. (Note the existence of a near contemporary also 
named Amin b. Muhammad Sa'ld in al-Bitar, Hilyat al-bashar, 1, p. 342.) 

152 . See al-Bitar, Hilyat al-bashar, 1, pp. 343-364; Muhammad Jamil al-Shatti, 
A'yan Dimashq fTl-qarn al-thalith ' asharwa nisf al-qarn al-rabi r 'ashar, 1201-1350 (n.p., 
1972), 2 nd edn., pp. 67-69. For further references, see Weismann, Taste of Modernity, 
p. 216 n. 72-73. 

On the thought of the Amir 'Abd al-Qadir and the Akbari awakening among the 
ulama of Damascus associated with him, see Michel Chodkiewicz, The Spiritual 
Writings of Amir Abd al-Kader (Albany, NY, 1995); Weismann, Taste of Modernity, chs. 
5-6; Commins, Islamic Reform , pp. 26-30: on his rescue of Christians, p.28. 

153 . See al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 1137; R. S. O’Fahey, Enigmatic Saint: 
Ahmad b. Idris and the Idrisi Tradition (London, 1990), p. 66 n. 44. There is some con- 
fusion in the literature surrounding this man. Al-Kattani records a Muhammad 
Tahir b. Sa'ld Sunbul al-MakkT [index and e.g. pp.364, 805, 1147], but also gives a 
Muhammad Tahir b. Sa'ld Sunbul al-Madam [e.g. pp. 199, 694], as given also by 
O’Fahey. {In places, al-Kattani refers simply to a Muhammad Tahir Sunbul. To add 
to the confusion, al-Bitar, Hilyat al-bashar, 2, p.747 gives a Tahir b. Sa'ld Sunbul 


64 


Notes to Chapter 2 

known as ‘Sunbul al-Dimashql’ (1150-1218): see also 3, p. 1325, where he gives 
Muhammad b. Sa'ld Sunbul (d. 12 18).} The verification in the literature of the exist- 
ence of a Muhammad Tahir b. Sa'ld Sunbul of the Hijaz, who transmitted from his 
father and to Yasln al-Mlrghanl, is ultimately what concerns us: al-Kattani’s crucial 
reference gives Yasln transmitting from Tahir without specifying whether he is al- 
Makkl or al-Madanl: see p. 1137. On his association with the Mlrgham family, see 
O’Fahey, Enigmatic Saint, pp. 65-66. 

154. Al-Bitar, Hilyat al-hashar, 2, pp. 1101-1102, drawing on al-Jabartl, Aja’ib al- 
dthdr. See also O’Fahey, Enigmatic Saint, pp. 61, 143. R. S. O’Fahey and Bernd Radtke, 
‘Neo-Sufism Reconsidered’, Der Islam 70: 1 (1993), p. 58 suggest that he may have 
fought back against the Wahhabi doctrine on the issue of saintly mediation. 

155. O’Fahey, Enigmatic Saint, p. 143. 

156. On this order see ‘Mirghaniyya’, El 2 , 7, p. 124. On 'Uthman, see O’Fahey 
and Radtke, ‘Neo-Sufism Reconsidered’, p. 58. 

157. See O’Fahey, Enigmatic Saint, pp.93, 132-133, 143 n.34. See further al- 
Kattani, Fihris al-fahdr is, pp. 103, 122, 197, 253, 557, 904, 906 and 1143. 

158. On this transmission, see for example al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 1137. 

159. See ibid., pp. 104-106. Another printed work is al-Lulu al-marsu fi-m a la 
asl lahu aw asluhu mawdu' (Cairo, 1305): ibid., p. 106; Brockelmann, GAL, Sup. II, 
p.776. 

160. A second printing is entitled K. al-Tawr al-aghld ft sharh al-Dawr al-a' la 
(Cairo, n.d.). 

161. See Brockelmann, GAL, Sup. II, p. 776; cf. McGregor, Sanctity and Sainthood, 
pp. 176-177 n. 50. 

162. See D, front page and p. 159, for example. His own shaykh was reportedly 
a Shadhili namesake of 'Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha'ranl, whom al-Qawuqjl admired 
greatly and whom he projected as an important link in chains of Shadhili teachers: 
see Winter, Society and Religion, pp. 70, 88. He also wrote Bawariq al-anwar al-jalTyafi 
asdnld al-saddt al-siifiya-. al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, p. 254. 

163. On him see further al-Kattani, Fihris al-faharis, index (under Muhammad b. 
Khalil al-Qawuqjl). 

164. See Chamberlain, Knowledge and Social Practice, p. 89. 

165. See for example ibid., pp. 109-110. 

166. The principle of the pre-eminent value attached to oral testimony in Islamic 
culture was maintained from early times through an increasingly elastic application 
of the ijdza to transmissions that could not be guaranteed by direct study of the text 
transmitted and the effective meeting between a transmitter and a receiver capable of 
understanding the text (which could often require a considerable period of compan- 
ionship between the two). While early authorities such as al-Shafi'l expressed serious 
reservations concerning this, ijdzas that did not denote a genuine authentication of 
learning actually accomplished became widely accepted in practice. The ‘child ijdza’ 
is one of several such categories: others are ijdzas granted to children still unborn or 
for works yet to be written; those obtained through a casual encounter or short, 


65 


A Prayer across Time 


unplanned interview; those requested and granted through correspondence without 
any actual meeting between the authority and the receiver (signalling an ‘approval’ of 
existing knowledge rather than actual transmission), and the ‘general ijaza’ encom- 
passing an entire oeuvre and typically granted without the actual hearing of texts. 
See ‘Idjaza’, El 2 , 3, pp. 1020-1022; further von Schlegell, Sufism , pp. 53, 125-128; 
Richard W. Bulliet, The Patricians of Nishapur (Cambridge, MA, 1972), p.50. Note 
that by focusing on the ijaza as an authentication of knowledge acquired through 
transmission based on the direct study of a text and the effective meeting between a 
transmitter and a receiver capable of understanding it (and designating all other kinds 
of ijaza in contrast as ‘formulaic’ or ‘fictitious’), there is a danger of neglecting other 
dimensions of its significance and role. Highlighted here, these other dimensions 
come to the fore in the case of a small prayer such as the Dawr, which required neither 
great feats of understanding nor a lengthy spell of companionship and direct study. 

Links apparently underpinned by ‘child ijdzas’ in our chains are: {D} Ibn 'Arab! ~ 
Radi al-Dln al-Tabari; {F} Ibn 'Arabl ~ al-Wanl; {A} Zakarlya al-Ansarl ~ Badr al- 
Dln al-GhazzI; {E} al-Suyutl ~ Badr al-Dln al-GhazzI; {E} al-Dimyatl ~ al-HarawI; 
{E} al-HarawI ~ al-Halabl; {A and E} Badr al-Dln al-GhazzI ~ Najmal-Dlnal-Ghazzl; 
{A and E} Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI ~ 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI; (E) 'Abd al-Ghanl 
al-NabulusI ~ Ibrahim b. Isma'll b. 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI. 

167. To give another example, when the historian 'Abd al-Rahman Abu Shama’s 
son died aged eight, his father wrote that he had taken him to hear hadith and other 
texts from over one hundred and seventy shaykhs. See Chamberlain, Knowledge and 
Social Practice, p. 140. Fathers would take their sons to shaykhs for baraka. In hadith 
transmission, they might take them very young to the oldest shaykhs in order to 
shorten the chain between them and the Prophet, raising concerns that ‘one’s shay- 
khs and their shaykhs were too young to understand the content of what they trans- 
mitted’. See ibid., p. 139; cf. Bulliet, The Patricians of Nishapur, pp. 50-51, emphasising 
that ‘the most important educational link was between the child and the old man’. In 
general, the insertion of young people into chains of transmission formed a central 
part of their initiation into the culture of the learned elite. See Chamberlain, Know- 
ledge and Social Practice, pp.88, 118-119, 124-125, 139-140. 

168. Compare, for example, with Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI’s general ijaza, received 
from his father Badr al-Dln who died when he was seven, in all 41 of Zakarlya al- 
Ansarl’s works. See al-GhazzI, al-Kawdkib al-sd’ira, 1, p.202. 

169. As a general point, young people in medieval Damascus were cautioned 
against ‘taking texts as shaykhs’ and were urged to read only under the personal super- 
vision of a shaykh: among other things, this would link them with all those who had 
transmitted the text before them, conferring on them the baraka of the line of trans- 
mission. See Chamberlain, Knowledge and Social Practice, pp. 138-139, 141-142, 148. 

170. See Yahya, Histoire, 2, Addenda B and D. 

171. The same chain from Ibn 'Arabl to al-Suyutl appears in al-Kattani’s descrip- 
tion of one route via which he transmits all of Ibn 'Arabl’s works (and all that the 
latter himself transmitted): see Fihris al-fahdris, p. 319. 


66 


Notes to Chapter 2 

172 . The chain from al-Qushashi back to Zakarlya al-Ansari appears also in an 
ijaza in al-Qushashl’s hand for the SahTh : see al-Kattani, Fihris al-fahdris, p.971. 

173 . I, fol. 62a. Alongside al-Qushashi, Ibrahim al-Kuranl, al-Dimyatl, al- 
Hifnawl and al-Bakrl, Zakarlya al-Ansari, the Ghazzls and 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI 
deserve mention for their critical positions within the chain map. 

174 . In this context the possibility of this being shorthand for a direct, uwaysi 
connection to Ibn 'Arab! is greatly weakened by the specific phraseology used. 

175 . See Addas, Quest for the Red Sulphur. ; p. 320. 

176 . Note that al-Qushashi gives his silsila in ‘ tarTq al-shaykh Muhyl al-Dln’ 
thus: al-Qushashi ~ Abu’l-Mawahib al-ShinnawI ~ his father 'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus 
~ 'Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha'ranl ~ Jalal al-Dln al-Suyutl ~ Kamal al-Din M b. M b. 
'Abd al-Rahman al-Shafi'l (also known as Imam al-Kamallya) ~ Shams al-Dln M b. 
M al-Jazarl ~ Zayn al-Dln Abu Hafs 'Umar b. al-Hasan b. Yazld b. Anilla al-Marashl 
~ 'Izz al-Dln Ahmad b. Ibrahim al-Faruthl al-Wasitl ~ Ibn 'Arabl. See Ahmad al- 
Qushashl, al-Simt al-majid fi talqln al-dhikr wa’l-baya wa ilhds al-khirqa wa saldsil ahl 
al-tawhTd (Haydarabad, AH 1327/28), pp. 105-106. Cf. p. 122: al-Qushashi ~ his 
father and al-ShinnawI ~ Isma'll al-Jabartl ~ Jamal al-Dln al-Daja'l al-Zabldl ~ 
Burhan al-Dln Ibrahim b. 'Umar b. 'All al-'AlawI al-Zabldl ~ Jamal al-Dln 'Abd al- 
Hamld b. Kuhl al-Ashkahl ~ Najm al-Dln 'Abdallah b. M al-Isfahanl ~ 'Izz al-Dln 
Ahmad al-Faruthl al-Wasitl ~ Ibn 'Arabl. The author thanks Michel Chodkiewicz 
for providing this. 

177. It has been argued that the travels of ulama combined with the wide influ- 
ence of sufi tariqas to make the 18 th century in particular a time of increasing cosmo- 
politan interaction in parts of the Muslim world. See Levtzion and Voll, Introduction, 
in Levtzion and Voll, eds., Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Reform, p. 5. 

178 . The Haramayn were an important meeting place given their central loca- 
tion and the requirement for the pilgrimage, but scholars and students also came 
there from all parts of the Muslim world specifically to teach and study: rich exchange 
took place there among scholars, particularly in Medina. See ibid., p. 7; Voll, ‘Hadith 
Scholars and Tariqahs’, pp. 264 ff. As Copty, ‘The Naqshbandiyya’, pp. 321-322 de- 
tails, the reputation of the Haramayn as centres of learning was enhanced as a result 
of Maniluk and Ottoman support for institutions and positions associated with both 
' ilm and tasawwuf. 

179 . As well as serving as gateways to the Haramayn, Cairo and Damascus were 
important centres of learning in their own right. 

180 . On general patterns of communication and interaction among scholars at 
this time, see Levtzion and Voll, Introduction, p. 8. 

181 . The influence of both tariqas became particularly widespread front the fol- 
lowing century: see, for example, Butrus Abu-Manneh, ‘Transformations of the 
Naqshbandiyya, 17 th — 20 th Century: Introduction’, Die Welt des Islams 43:3 (2003), 
p. 303. Significantly, El-Rouayheb, ‘Opening the Gate’, pp.264, 271-273 links the 
growing and increasingly open support for the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud and for 
Ibn 'Arabl in the Arab lands of the Ottoman Empire from the 17 th century to the 


67 


A Prayer across Time 

spread there of originally non-Arab turuq, such as the Naqshbandiyya and the 
Khalwatiyya. 

182. McGregor, Sanctity and Sainthood , p. 74 points to the Wafa’iyya’s emergence 
from the Shadhiliyya as a case in point. 

183. Note that he also appears in chains attached to al-Futuhat al-MakkTya\ see 
Yahya, Histoire, 2, p. 540, 6b and 6d ii. 

184. See Nafi, ‘Tasawwuf and Reform’, p. 329. 

185. For different views in the debate concerning the possible characterisation of 
the constitutive elements of this position in terms of a rising revivalist/reformist 
‘neo-Sufism’ (in combination with certain other elements) see, for example, O’Fahey, 
Enigmatic Saint, pp.2 ff.; O’Fahey and Radtke, ‘Neo-Sufism Reconsidered’, and 
Ahmad Dallal, ‘The Origins and Objectives of Islamic Revivalist Thought, 1750— 
1 850’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 113: 3 (1993), pp. 341-359. 

The affiliation of several of these ulama to the Naqshbandiyya is noteworthy: 
Medina was a major centre for the tarJqa during the 17 th century. See van Bruinessen, 
‘Shari'a Court’, p. 179; Voll, ‘Hadith Scholars and Tariqahs’, p.268; Copty, ‘The 
Naqshbandiyya’, p. 322. While one cannot generalise about this tarJqa as a whole, it 
was to develop a strong tradition of reform at least through the Mujaddidi line. On 
attitudes towards Ibn 'Arab! in the tarJqa prior to Sirhindl, see Hamid Algar, ‘Reflec- 
tions of Ibn 'Arabl in Early Naqshbandi Tradition’, JMIAS X (1991), pp. 45-66. 

186. See Algar, ‘Reflections of Ibn 'Arabl’, p. 60. On his legacy, see Weismann, 
Taste of Modernity, ch. 2. As Abu-Manneh, ‘Salafiyyah’ demonstrates, Shaykh Khalid’s 
call came substantially as a reaction (and challenge) to the expansion in Baghdad of 
an at least partly Wahhabi-inspired Salafi worldview. He provided an alternative reli- 
gious path for the community, projected as better reflecting the substance of Islam 
than Salafi beliefs alone (as embodied in the city’s rising Salafi trend). Shaykh Khalid 
was heir to the legacy of Shah Wall Allah, ‘whose belief in wahdat al-wujiid did not 
stop him front writing a treatise on the virtues of Ibn Taymlya and embracing a range 
of his ideas’. See Nafi, ‘Abu al-Thana’ al-Alusi’, p.488. 

187. See David Commins, ‘'Abd al-Qadir al-Jaza’irl and Islamic Reform’, The 
Muslim World 78 (1988), pp. 121-131; idem, Islamic Reform, pp. 26-30. On the Salafiyya 
of late Ottoman Damascus see Weismann, Taste of Modernity, ch. 8. 

188. Cf. Stefan Reichmuth, ‘Arabic Literature and Islamic Scholarship in the 
1 7 th / 1 8 th Century: Topics and Biographies’, Die Welt des Islams 42 : 3 (2002), p. 287. 

189. Such a line of enquiry might also be pursued by expanding the characterisa- 
tion of contemporary users summarised earlier. 


68 


3 


THE PRAYER FOR SPIRITUAL 

Elevation and Protection 


Properties' 


Many who have presented or transmitted the prayer during the last 
four hundred years have emphasised the importance of reciting it 
diligently and of taking it, as one puts it, ‘as a regular practice ( wird )’. 2 
Several recommend that it be recited every morning and evening , 3 
and some in the morning only. Others add that it should also be re- 
cited in times of difficulty or distress . 4 One way to encourage regular 
reading has been to tie the prayer to the Awrad, as in some ijazas 
associated with it among certain contemporary sufi circles discussed 
earlier. In one copy the prayer is integrated into a daily/nightly read- 
ing cycle, repeated fourteen times: an opening prayer (h izb iftitdh), 
a numbered interface text {him), Ibn 'Arabl’s wird for the day/night, 
the Dawr and a concluding prayer {hizb al-ikhtitdm): Other copies 
incorporate it after the full complement of the Awrad : 6 where this 
is not the case, the owner of an Awrad copy sometimes adds it by 
hand at the end.' Yet there are many more cases where the prayer 
is not associated with the Awrad* and several copies offer specific 
advice concerning what should be recited before 9 and after 10 it without 
reference to the Awrad. Such recommendations typically encompass 
the salawdt, invocations of Divine Names and formulae emphasising 
God’s unique power, but there are many variations . 11 

In more substantial treatments recommendations concerning 
recitation of the prayer are intertwined with a detailing of its spe- 
cial properties {khawdss), for the latter are activated only through 
its proper use. Commentators and copyists outdo each other in 

69 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

describing these. By way of illustration, a particularly comprehen- 
sive statement of the prayer’s properties by the AH 12 th — 13 th cen- 
tury commentator al-Damunl (written in rhymed prose in Arabic) 
is given below. 12 

I ask Allah. . .that [the prayer] may benefit whoever recites it with 
sincerity and firm inner belief, and that it may achieve their 
desired end for whoever perseveres in the benefits it contains, for 
He is the One who Bestows with Noble Generosity, the One who 
Knows the condition of those who recite. Whoever uses what is 
in the prayer or recites it with complete inner belief may achieve 
their desired goal, but whoever recites it or uses its benefits while 
raising objections will gain nothing but distress and corruption. 

I include. . .some of the benefits of this great prayer, in respect to 
which the response will never fail provided that one has a pure 
heart. Among its benefits are the following: 

Whoever reads it regularly and diligently morning and evening 
need not fear poverty, blindness or broken bones. He will be in 
God’s secure custody en route and at rest on land and at sea. He 
need not fear beasts of prey, loss of his possessions, accidents, 
aches and pains, illnesses, shadow companions (male and female), 
disobedient and insolent jinn, or malicious storm demons. 13 He 
need not fear the arrows of war, for he will always be victori- 
ous, never defeated. He need not fear any kind of enemy, human 
or jinn. 14 He need not fear highway robbers, for Allah will rip 
to utter shreds anyone who stands against him. If the one who 
recites the prayer boards a ship, he need not fear harm or malady, 
being taken captive, drowning, or any epidemic, be it airborne 
or earth-bound, on land or at sea, nor the ship being holed and 
torn apart. 1 ’ 

Whoever recites the prayer will be safe from enemies and 
evil oppressors and from all the unjust and envious in all the 
worlds. 16 He will be respected and well-liked by all who see him, 
and they will be unable to endure being away from him. He will 
be like the sun and the moon among the stars: the heavenly and 


70 


Properties 


earthly worlds will love him all his life. He will be protected 
from migraine, headache, throbbing and shooting pain, tooth, 
ear, eye and stomach ache, facial palsy, hemiplegia, convulsions, 
and every malady that afflicts humankind . 17 He will be protected 
from devilish insinuations and thoughts, will have pleasant 
dreams, and will see only what gladdens him in all his days. 

Whoever recites [the prayer] will be released from imprison- 
ment, constraint and captivity, especially if his reciting is deep- 
rooted and strong. [Reciting the prayer] makes childbirth easy 
for the divorcee, and through it every pressing need is met. It 
removes fevers and chills, and brings home strays and runaways. 
It reminds one of the Testimony of Faith (shahada) at the time 
of death, and helps one in the questioning of the two angels, and 
in the fear caused by sudden death . 18 It awakens the heart from 
the slumber of heedlessness, and helps in sincere repentance and 
in erasing one’s lapses and errors. It elevates one to the highest 
stations, in this world and after death. It preserves one from asso- 
ciation with the Evil One 19 and from the serious afflictions that 
affect babies . 20 It safeguards the one who recites it from all kinds 
of jinn, from colic and neuralgia, and from all winds, especially 
the ill wind 21 of the evening and morning. It protects against 
the sting of scorpions and the bite of vipers and snakes, against 
infectious diseases and plague, and whatever harms humankind. 
It thwarts black magic and all machinations, and the knots of 
ill-intent . 22 It repels from whoever recites it the army and sol- 
diers of the enemy, bequeaths the memorising of knowledge and 
the meanings of the glorious Qur’an, and preserves the heart 
and mind from thoughts [insinuated by] the accursed [Satan]. 
If recited after 'asr it removes misery and poverty, especially if 
sfenit al-Waqi'a is recited too, because this sura is an irresistible 
force . 23 

We have mentioned just some of the benefits: strive for them, 
you who have freed yourself from bondage to habits. Benefit is 
in accordance with sincerity, faithfulness and firm inner belief; 
lack of benefit results from distrust and ignominious objecting. 


71 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


The one who firmly believes will be in enduring felicity in this 
world, in the isthmus ( barzakh ) and on the Appointed Day, while 
the one who raises objections will be in a painful torment: hell 
suffices for him, an evil resting place. 

These results arise only through the [spiritual] breaths (al- 
anfds), that is, by receiving [instruction regarding] them from 
Masters of Wisdom ( al-sdda al-akyas) . 24 If someone is without 
these [spiritual] breaths, it is as if he builds a wall without a foun- 
dation. However, if he can’t find a perfect one ( al-kdmil ), then 
he should make pure his intention in this matter, and perhaps he 
will acquire some of these benefits, if his innermost intention is 
good. What we have mentioned is sufficient for those who seek, 
and the [prayer’s] benefits are not hidden from the perfect ones. 

Many of the properties detailed above and in comparable lists re- 
flect the preoccupations of a pre-modern world in which forces of 
nature, often attributed to active but imperceptible spirits such as 
the jinn, were a potent reminder of the precariousness of human 
life . 25 Special liturgical texts attributed to various saints of early and 
medieval Islam served at the front line in the effort to ward off these 
threats to life and limb, by subduing such forces . 26 They could also 
be used to neutralise the potential hostility or harmful intentions of 
jinn in any other circumstances, as indeed those of fellow men. The 
protective power attributed to such texts conferred a talismanic char- 
acter upon them, reflected in the sense which has become attached 
to terms such as hizb and hirz commonly used to designate them 2 ' 
(and in the instructions for use that often accompany them). The 
power or baraka of such texts is perceived to derive from that which 
inheres in the Qur’anic verses, salawat (and sometimes muqatta'dt or 
letter clusters prefacing certain suras) they encompass . 28 The saintly 
stature of their authors confers a particular efficacy upon them, for it 
is believed that the prayers of a saint are more likely to be heard. As 
inspired compositions bestowed only upon saintly figures, such texts 
indeed serve as vehicles for their authors’ spiritual authority 29 and, 
of more immediate interest to the supplicant, for the unique inter- 


72 


Properties 

cessory potential that flows from their closeness to God as His 
friends. 

Taking its place in this liturgical arsenal, the Daivr appears along- 
side a wide range of other protective prayers in our sources, no- 
tably the ahzdb of Abu’l-Hasan al-Shadhili 30 and the hirz of Abu 
Madyan , 31 but also less well-known prayers with properties of heal- 
ing or defending against the plague, for example . 32 Commentators 
draw out the protective potential of the Daivr by sketching talismans 
and ‘magic squares’ with words, letters and numbers: these repre- 
sent individual verses, and are often accompanied by details of their 
specific uses . 33 Copyists enhance this protective quality by inserting 
additional supplications with protective force . 34 While most of our 
sources stress the importance of reciting the prayer if its protective 
and other benefits are to be enjoyed, 3 ' the talismanic character of the 
text is highlighted by the latest of our commentators, al-Qawuqjl, 
who suggests that such benefits accrue from simply carrying the 
text. The dead, too, can benefit, he adds, for if it is buried with them 
they will be protected from the torment of the grave . 36 

As al-Damunl’s list makes clear, the prayer’s powers also encom- 
pass the materialisation of ‘positive’ effects with regard to relations 
in the world, in particular the awakening of esteem and affection in 
people’s hearts. Some mention that it can bring forth obedience ‘in 
both earthly and heavenly realms’ to whoever recites it. Other lists 
add to this the power to facilitate exigencies of buying, selling and 
other kinds of transaction .' 7 Of particular interest to those who travel 
the spiritual journey of tasawwuf further benefits are reflected in the 
prayer’s title. One copyist thus offers the following version of this: 
Hizb al-wiqaya li-man ardda al-ivildya, ‘prayer of protection for one 
who strives for close friendship [with God ]’. 38 Commentators and 
copyists repeat that people of verification who are sincere in service 
have ‘tried and tested’ the prayer’s special properties. Through their 
pure, elevated spiritual resolution ( himma ), they have experienced its 
benefits and witnessed uncountable secrets . 39 

According to commentators and copyists, the prayer is thus ‘an 
eternal secret’: it is ‘a sharp sword’ that emanates from ‘the most 


73 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


secret of affairs’. 40 As in the case of other prayers, they attribute the 
powers of the Daivr to the Qur’anic verses and Divine Names it 
encompasses. 41 The benefits associated with both elements are ex- 
plained, but commentators pay particular attention to the Divine 
Names, 4: citing well-known Qur’an and hadith texts that urge use of 
these in supplication and detail the benefits that are associated with 
them. 43 As al-Damunl puts it, the Names are thus ‘the door - indeed 
the keys to the locked doors, and they encompass a speedy response 
for anyone who orients his heart to his Lord.’ 44 Al-Tafilatl repeats a 
caution advanced by scholar-mystics that the Divine Names should 
be used not for the exclusive end of earthly fortune, but out of pure 
obedience to His command to use them in supplication. Thus en- 
trusting matters to God, he explains, it becomes possible for one to 
succeed in worshipping Him as the goal, and in having one’s earthly 
requests met consequentially. 45 

Like al-Damunl, most commentators and copyists single out as a 
sine qua non for actualising the prayer’s benefits the sincerity of the 
reader’s intention, and their purity of heart. 46 Some explicitly add to 
this the need, to which al-Damunl alludes, for ‘permission from a 
guide ( murshid ) perfect in knowledge and conduct’. 4 In the absence 
of such guidance, however, recitation of the prayer is still encour- 
aged (with pure intention), as is the hope for actualising at least some 
of its potential benefits. 41. This suggests that such recitation without 
a specific ijdza was countenanced, in evidence and perhaps even rela- 
tively widespread by the late 18 th century, adumbrating popularisa- 
tion of the prayer in the following centuries. 


The text and its contents 

It seems more appropriate in discussing a prayer like the Daivr to 
think in terms of a stable text and its variants, rather than a critical 
edition. As a living text in constant use, versions displaying small 
differences have become established as equally acceptable across 
time, reflecting a cumulative process of variation taking place at the 


74 


The text and its contents 


interface between oral transmission and committing to writing, and 
possibly compounded by the operation of personal preference and 
tricks of memory. The variants of which they are aware (which they 
may have discovered in written copies they have surveyed) have in- 
deed been carefully marked by some who have presented the prayer 
in the last few centuries, pointing to a conviction of the equal valid- 
ity and prayerful importance of each of these . 49 At the same time, 
copyists and commentators implicitly showcase their own ‘personal’ 
text, which they may have received through an authorisation from 
a shaykh. 

Towards establishing a stable text of the prayer and identifying 
accepted variations in this we surveyed a wide range of written cop- 
ies, in the hope of building a picture of how it has been recorded 
(and thus recited) and transmitted through the last four centuries. 
There are numerous differences in these copies: perhaps somewhat 
surprisingly, these also touch the Qur’anic content. In some cases 
this reflects a legitimate Qur’anic alternative, but in others it must 
be attributed to inaccuracy of presentation .’ 0 Many apparent textual 
differences in prayer copies can of course be put down to errors of 
hearing, memorisation, reading or copying, but there are also inter- 
polations, some pious, others explanatory in character. We do not 
mention each and every difference in the notes accompanying the 
text, as is often done in critical editions. As our target is a text we 
hope may serve as a ‘standard’ version that is readily usable, only 
significant and interesting differences felt to constitute genuine vari- 
ations are recorded. In preparing the text the aim was to bring out 
in the best possible form the meanings of the prayer and the senti- 
ments that infuse it, while paying due attention to internal structure 
and consistency (both of the overall text and its individual verses), 
literary dimensions, and aspects of auditory texture like rhythm and 
fluency. 

One might legitimately ask why it is worthwhile to produce such 
a text. First, from a devotional perspective it can be important for 
those who use the prayer to be confident of reciting an authentic and 
accurate text. Differences between printed versions specifically (i.e. 


75 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


those actually in use today for devotional purposes) reviewed by the 
present author may not appear great, but they are significant enough 
to be noteworthy. Moreover, there are grammatical errors and spell- 
ing inaccuracies in several of these. Second, the identification of a 
stable text makes possible a well-founded mapping in the prayer of 
characteristic motifs and subtleties of its author’s perspective. 

The text we present is based on thirteen copies set out in the Ap- 
pendix, all but one of them in the form of unpublished manuscripts. 
These are the most important of the copies reviewed, selected for 
their association with a chain of transmission, a specific date (pay- 
ing particular attention to the earliest specifically), or a known fig- 
ure .’ 1 Two further copies with full vowels were closely consulted for 
clarity. Five of the copies used arise in commentaries on the prayer. 
Particular care must be exercised in working with these as the greater 
volume of text involved can make it more likely for the copyist (or 
scribe) to introduce errors . 52 

The Davor has thirty-three verses, suggesting the image of the 
traditional string of prayer-beads ( tasblh ; subha). Its recitation also 
evokes the image of a necklace: Divine Name pairs and Qur’anic 
texts form focal points of precious stones, strung together and set off 
by supplications and rhythmic word chains. Each verse begins with 
the invocation of two Divine Names and ends in Allah, the Complete 
or Unifying Name ( al-ism al-javh '), with which the prayer as a whole 
also begins (Alldhumma) P Within each prayer verse the Names in- 
voked, the specific object of the supplication and the Qur’anic text 
are integrated, the latter (more precisely its Qur’anic context) ef- 
fectively furnishing an illustrative and explanatory scenario for the 
former. 

As Qur’anic texts and invocations of Divine Names form the 
prayer’s outstanding features, the notes that accompany the transla- 
tion elaborate on these areas specifically . 54 Where this is not given 
in the prayer we provide the full Qur’anic verse, indicating how the 
author of the prayer has quoted this.” We detail the immediate con- 
text of each Qur’anic text quoted, making it possible to elaborate 
the relationship between this and the specific object of supplication. 

76 


The text and its contents 


The notes also identify Names invoked that do not derive from the 
traditional list of ninety-nine, 56 pointing up those among them that 
can be found in the Qur’an. 57 

In rendering the Names into English we have drawn on Ibn 
'Arabl’s explication of these in his K. Kashf al-mana 'an asm d’ Allah 
al-husnd. ih Here he provides a threefold elaboration of the qualities 
of each Name as the servant might relate to them: first, from the 
perspective of the servant who has ‘absolute need’ for these qualities, 
since they denote the Essence ( al-ta'alluq ); second, a spiritual know- 
ledge and realisation of the meanings of these qualities as they relate 
to the Divine Elimself and as they relate to the servant (. al-tahaqquq ); 
and third, in the manifestation of these qualities in the servant in 
a manner appropriate to the servant, just as they appear in Ilim 
{al-takhalluq) . 59 To bring out this understanding of the qualities 
of the Names it was necessary in several cases to provide extended 
meanings in the translation, given in square brackets. Beyond this, 
a few such brackets are also used as an aid to accuracy and clarity in 
rendering the sense of the original (including some Qur’anic texts) 
into English. 

With respect to the prayer’s Qur’anic content, over a third of the 
Qur’anic texts incorporated take the form of a direct divine address 
to a prophet, or appear on the tongue of a prophet. Moses (Musa) 
features most frequently among them, but there are also utterances 
by Abraham (Ibrahim) and Joseph (Yusuf), for example. 60 Prayer 
verse 13, which incorporates part of a Qur’anic verse concerning 
Joseph, serves to illustrate the rich and subtle composition which 
shapes the prayer text, while pointing also to the operation of dif- 
ferent levels of meaning within it. Taken from the story of Joseph 
in surat Yusuf, the Qur’anic verse in question tells of the impact 
of Joseph’s stunning beauty on the women invited by the wife of 
the Egyptian in whose employ he was. They had been whispering 
maliciously that she had been soliciting him, but when they saw him 
they were so astounded that they cut their hands with the knives 
provided for the banquet to which she had invited them. The verse 
ends with their exclamation ‘This is no mortal; he is no other than a 


77 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


noble angel! ’ In verse 13 of the prayer, the supplicant solicits a vision 
of the Divine Beauty, as in the vision experienced by the women of 
the beauty embodied by Joseph. The request is addressed through 
the Names of Majesty (invoking explicitly the Names al-Jalil and 
al-Kablr), so that through them the Divine Beauty will descend in 
His Solicitous Majesty. Verse 13 thus alludes to an experience of 
utter awe in the face of Beauty which discloses the Divine Majesty, 
Perfection and Solicitude ( ijldl , ikmdl, iqbdl). 61 The framing of the 
request in terms of the metaphor of ‘clothing with a robe’ resonates 
immediately with Joseph’s own ‘cloak of many colours’, but also 
with the khirqa or sufi mantle, a symbol of those Perfect Servants in 
whom the divine qualities appear through the mysteries of takhalluq 
referred to above. 

Regarding the literary style of the prayer, while it is impossible to 
emulate the original an effort has been made to retain characteristic 
features of this in translation, particularly those relating to auditory 
texture. These include the ending of each of the prayer’s verses in 
‘Allah’, 62 and the frequent multiple word chains. In the latter case re- 
peated word patterns that help build rhythm (using particular forms 
of the verbal noun, for example) cannot be repeated in translation. 63 

It remains finally to underline the embedded-ness of the prayer 
text (like other works of Ibn 'Arabl) in the universe of traditional 
Muslim piety, a universe ultimately rooted in the revealed text with 
its leitmotifs of man’s utter dependence and vulnerability, and the 
potential nobility of his aspirations and destiny. 


78 


Translation and 
Arabic text 


The Most Elevated Cycle 
that brings one close to 
Every Station of The Most High 


by 


Shaykh Muhyi al-Dm 


Muhammad b. All b. al- Arabi 


80 







1 ^ 1 6 ^ 


l^Jj^ 1 l/^ 1 LS^ 


8i 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

In the Name of Allah, the All-Compassionate, the Most Merciful 

1. O Allah! O You who are the Ever-Living, the Self- Subsisting! 
In You I establish my protection: shelter me with the shielding, 
protective sufficiency and safeguarding, the reality and proof, 
the stronghold and security of In the Name of Allah . 64 

2. Admit me, O You who are the First and Last, to the hidden 
domain of the unknowable, secret and encompassing treasure 
of As Allah wills! There is no power save in Allah. 61 

3. Unfurl over me, O You who choose Clemency [over censure], 
who Veil in Protection, 6 " the sheltering wing, the covering 
veil, the preservation and deliverance of Holdfast to the bond of 
Allah. 61 

4. Build around me, O You who are the All-Encompassing, 68 the 
All-Powerful, the secure, encircling wall, the glorious canopy, 
the might and majesty of That is better, that is of the signs of 
Allah. 69 

5. Place me under Your protection, O You who are Observant 
[of all needs] and Responsive [to all requests] : preserve my 
soul and faith, my family and children, my home and estate, 
through the watchfulness, protectiveness and timely relief and 
assistance of But [Satan] will not hurt them anything , save by the 
leave of Allah. 10 


82 


K>*' 


Translation and Arabic text 


0 iM ~P 0 


^-■1.2k^J I ji I <JJ I i 11 I 


0 ^ 9 Oo> 


9 $s s S> 


1.4.2k <_i L4j <_iLo2k_i ^ i a ^ k li cJu/sA i dL L L ^ It 


I \ 


iX 0 


*ll] I ^kj.u.1 ^ L I La^J 


9 s 9 <*> 


bjfk'i <111 pLijLo SjjIj jj-u uoc. jjjjfLo j^-1 L Jjl L ^Vl-olj X 

«dJL i\ 


S // o o •- •- 


> L^j <jLu^a i 1 1 ~s. jj_i_u i_iu£ jLL-u L p J~k L ^-lc. JjujjIj X 

o> Os 9 s 0 s 

<111 Ij n i ,-»'><* ■ I j 


? 5, ,s ? , - f f 


l j£. jjljj-u jm^ <LLJ (jLol jjj-u ^jlc. jjli L 1^ i~k a L 1 

S S S S S S S » ✓ / S 

<H " + 0 ' ' S ° ' ' ' S s s 

<JJ I oLi] ^j-o ditj dllj 4 .ttkf. 


o 9 o s 9 9 S 9 


^ b '-r ’..'> n b vA> b (. b 0 

$ ?0 S 0 ^ S s Qss ' s s s ss s s s s * ss s 

^11 5 I < 1 1 Vi -vj& j I . A I 4 <lilc.l SjLc.1 ^^jJLoj ^jlj j (_^-lljj 

s s s s s s s s s *+ s ** s ** s 


<111 j°3L 


1- A: word missing- B: missing but gives as alternative 

2- D omits j^dJij but gives as alternative 

3- Order of the last four words varies, some omit tsjij or ju 

4- D, E and M add tu 

5 ■ D : -1^ I ^ u^jE-aj fjs Uj ( Q. 2 ■ 1 0 2 ) 


83 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

6. Shield me, O You who Protect [from corruption] and Repel 
[all evil] , n by Your Names, Verses and Words, from the evil of 
Satan and of the powerful, such that if an oppressor or tyrant 
treats me unjustly, he will be taken by An enveloping chastisement 
of Allah] 2 

7. Deliver me, O You who Abase [those who would set themselves 
above You] and who Avenge [without pardon] , from Your 
iniquitous slaves who wrong me and from their minions, such 
that if one of them intends me ill, Allah will forsake him, 

Setting a seal upon his hearing and his heart , and laying a cover on 
his seeing. Who then will guide him, after Allah? 9 * * 12, 

8. Protect me, O You who Seize and Vanquish, from their 
treacherous deception: repel them from me censured, driven 
away in blame and routed, through the damaging, corrupting 
and destruction in And there was no host to help him, apart from 
Allah™ 

9. Let me taste, O You who are Ever Glorified and Praised,' 1 Ever 

Sanctified and Lloly, the sweet delight and intimate converse of 

Come forward and fear not; for surely you are among those who are 

secure 1 '' in the shelter of Allah. 


84 


Translation and Arabic text 


OlH L» - 


Ox x x t 


A I l—i V i Vi 1 1 jjSj tdjLaKj ittiLjj 7 ttJjLaj-uL L ajLo L *1 

X XXX XX X w x •* X X 

xx 0 J»x X ^Oxxxjjxx xxjJl^x OX 3 J 1 X OX x oi X 

‘till <4 _laiLc. jLlAi. jl ^JUi jjLi I l~i I I < I II j 

0 X 0 XX i XX X X ^ X xi x x 0 ^ X 0 ^ X 5 ^ X £ XX 

^jic. (jaC-Lill 8 «LaJi=J I giljjjc. -% jV' n L <Jj_o L ^ ~ij V 

XX ♦» X X XXXX X *• X 

xxx x Ox x ox xx xxxx ^ ^ xx x xx .J* 0 £ x 0 x 

(JjlA 2 g.J <a1sj <»■<!' U 10 <ill 4jjjk cji.gl 9 li^.l (j I n JjLi 

XXXX ' £ X ' x ** x X 

OxO oxoxx^xx xx xx 

<111 JJU ,j_0 <J.i$J Sjl < tlf 6j »X|_1 ^ylc. 

X .? 0 X £ x 0 ? Q ? Q x 0 Ox xx X .? 51 x x^ x x Ox 

jiaSJJjlj <?» luK La L ^ ' Vs I j A 

^x^^OxxO ^ x x x xx ox Ox Ox x ^ 0 x x ^ 0 x 

<a j j > XI ~n <ifi <1 LoS 11 J ) flj'i j n » i J 1 1 n~g'i 1 ^yjJ) ~i d 

^ X X XXXXXXXX X 

l»» >* 0 

‘*11 1 gjjd O’ 0 

x X 51 0 X x x 0 OX x X ^ X 51 X /I x ? ? x 0 xx 

gjjl 1 ^ •**■'< Vj (Jasl 6 LLo SjJ L ^ j ><11 L j Ij ^ 

<11 1 12 g_ii£ ^yi ^jaloV I 


6 - E, C, H, I, J and IVf jjU. C: jjlj. H adds ns_)L L 

7- B and O aLU*aI 3 ^ 

8 . D, E, F, C, H, Kand M: o-JLtJi 

9- A, D, E, C, Land M^a^i 

10 - C and H <JI <u iil (El gives <111 < 1 aA as alternative) 

11- Word chain varies: some give instead of or in addition to 

jA-Aii, and give jajS: instead of or in addition to jaoj^ 

12- E and \ J-iiA and in margin auS ^ or *uji J-Aij <011 aaS ^ ; F, G, J and K J— al, 
4-UI. El omits the phrase and proceeds directly from 3-aA-Wi 3-« to verse 10, 
thus collating verses 9 and 10 into a single verse- Note that the Quranic 
verse ends with jaWI 


85 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

10. And let them taste, O You who inflict Harm and take away 
Life, the exemplary punishment, the evil consequences and 
annihilation in So the last remnant of the people who did evil was 
cut off Praise belongs to Allah J 1 

11. Make me safe, O You who are Peace of Perfection, the Giver of 
Security, from the sudden sorties of the enemy forces, through 
the aim of the beginning of the verse For them are good tidings 
in the life of this world and in the hereafter. There is no changing the 
words of Allah f 

12. Crown me, O You who are the Sublimely Magnificent, the 
One who Raises in Honour, with the crown of the awesome 
grandeur, the majestic dominion, the sovereignty, might and 
magnificence of And do not let their saying grieve you. Indeed the 
honour and glory belong to Allah J 9 

13. Clothe me, O You who are Solicitous in Benevolent Majesty, 
the Incomparably Great, in the robe that renders the august 
majesty, complete perfection and attentive solicitude in And 
when they saw him , they so adtnired him that they cut their hands, 
saying ‘May we be saved by Allah! ’ 80 

14. Bring down upon me, O You who are the Eminent in 
Affection, the Constant in Love, love [extended] from You, 
so that through it the hearts of Your servants will be guided 
to me, yielding to me with love, affectionate and unwavering, 
from the filling with love, the softening of hearts and the 
coming into loving union in They love them as if it were love for 
Allah, but those who believe are more arden t in love for Allah . 81 


86 


Translation and Arabic text 


$ Ox 9 


9 9 y 


Jjjjl j±\^ £_Lai Jljj JLj Jl£3 L jL-<is L p (j *3 j I j \ • 

* ? O y y 9- yy 

<JJ \ | ^ | ^ a I U 


■ O y '0 y yQ y y yQ y 9 o 9 y 9 - 


«ul «Lljj <jUu ol.ic.VI <ljj il^c*. < 13 - 0 ^ L i^Luu L ^JLojj \ \ 

y y y y y y y y y ** / 

jl y y y Oxx y ~ y y 0& yy y 0 9 9 9 y 

<111 Cl)l oKI <JjJ_uV S jCi.V I Luji I £l i~k 1 1 ^gj Jill 1 

y y y y y y y »* x y »* x 

9 yy y o9 y y y o ^y y y y & 9 y 9 y 0 2 xx 

j LLxL-u 14 J^U. p <_» L^-c ^ Ll jjl . o L a ilAr. L N V 

y y y y y y y y y y x »» x 

o' y y $ $ o99oyyo9oyyy ^y y y $ 

<U SjjJI Jjl ^J_ja Vj 15 <_oiic. jC. 

<jj I j Lola <JLal 16 JLo£l JiL=k.l <jl1^. Lj J j 1 *•* L ^ *« ■ ■ ■ * 1 1 I j NY” 

y y y y y y y y y ** y y 

o' X X x o9 x c5 9 y o y y O 6 y y 9 y 0 y 0 y 

<11 ^LU jlaj L>*-kaj <Sj-£l 


' 0 xx x 0 > 5<x 


L^j 17 ^ t A~k ij jLixia dllo <i o ^Jc. 4i“L9 Li jfj*- ( j Y 1 

Ox OX 0X0 Jl y y x Jl y y x Jl y y x x 9 99 

I Q * 1 1 *i -*-9 c Q \ U I” t Sjj-oJI^ S^JLoJIj 4jL2fc-oJL dljLi£. 


iK to> 9 5 - 


^ $ 9 y 0 9 y § 9 


<JJ L^. J-lil I^JLol 


13- E adds u in margin as alternative 

14- C: JUa. G, H and M omit word 

15- K adds o,^; some change the order to jikUojSio 

16- Some give instead Jsu and JL=S; some add JL«^ and vary the order 

17- A- ^AV. j jixc. 

18- G, H, I, J, L and M omit word 

19- F, G, H, I, J and K omit word 


87 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

15. Show upon me, O You who are the Manifest and Hidden, 
traces of the luminous mysteries of He loves them and they love 
Him: [they are] soft towards the believers, hat'd on the unbelievers, 
striving in the path of Allah. 92 

16. Turn my face, O Allah, O You who are the Eternal Refuge, the 
Essential Light, with the sheer purity, beauty, intimacy and 
illumination of So if they dispute with you, say, ‘I have surrendered 
myself to Allah ’, 83 

17. Beautify me, O You who are the Originator [in Beauty] of 
the heavens and the earth, 84 who possess Sublime Majesty 
and Ennobling Generosity, with the flawless fluency, supreme 
eloquence and surpassing skill in ‘ Unloose the knot upon my 
tongue, so that they understand my words’ 85 through the kindly, 
merciful gentleness of Then their skins and their hearts soften to 
the remembrance of Allah. 96 

18. Gird me, O You who are the Most Severe in Assault, 8 the 
All-Compeller, with the sword of awesome forcefulness and 
invincible power, from the glorious strength, omnipotence and 
might in There is no help to victory except from Allah." 

19. Give me ever, O You who Expand and Open up to Victory, 
the joyful delight in ‘My Lord, lay open for me my chest, and 
ease for me my task’" through the subtle sentiments, the inner 
affections in Did we not lay open for you your chest? and through 
the happy exuberance and glad tidings in That day the believers 
shall rejoice, in the victorious help of Allah f 


88 


Translation and Arabic text 


9y $ 9y o 9 $ 9 - 


V yy 0 0 


p (j _i 1 i jl^_jjl jlj_cul jLii O^L 1 L* jJ&Lia L ^jl £. \ 0 

* ' y 9 y 9 y y yy $ y y 0 9 yy $ y 

dl I J \y II (jjJJbUvj ^jic. bjC. I Jjjj_oj)dl ( _j-lc- djl 

/ ✓ / '* / / / ✓ ^ # / 

* o o* ' ' a*?? * ' * - £ ? jj H - - 

20 jjlj_Ljjl ,_^ujl JLa^ ? I a <«-> < ^ (j ~kj L j ft i<*» L p I II <Ua.jj N *\ 

JJ O'fO'O'O?'' & ' o ' 

dl ^ -s. j ci ft 1 1 ii I Jas d L a j La 

jdjSVIj J^LsJ I Ij L ,_)AjV I j C IjLajmJ I L ^ \ fft W 

0 y 9 y 0 y y 0 ? y 0 9 0 90 y y y y y y y y y y y y 

^ jl I j ^ a a ' ^jjLcuJ Sjac. JXa-Ij 21 d.l^dlj Ac^LJIj 4_=». I i^alL 

iK o x 0 9 9 99 y 0 9 9 99 9 y C5 9 Jt 0 ' S'" 

<UI !_jJ I A^-ijiaj JjIi aj <Aj 22 4 ft~ij <il JJ 

y y y y y y y y y y 

$9 y 6 £ y 0 ' 9 $y y 0 y y y y 0 ^y y 

SjaJIj 6 jjJul I j 23 a M(j 1 1 - a » , „ < jLha. L ^jVi ti 1 11 j i j i iu L ^jjJaj NA 

^ 0 0 J5 9 0 $ y y $ 9 yy g y 0 ^y y y y 

<111 die. VI j i y\ \ 1 1 Lj b jC. Cjjjia. ,_)uLi ^j-o Axidlj 

y y y y y y y y y y y 

0 y 0 y 0 £ y $yyyyQy9$yy9 y y $ yy o yy 

^j-lL I k 6^-i-a-o 4-^.j Lis Li j. a Li Li ^_ic 1^ 

y y y y y Q y y y 0 y Q y Q yy y y y y 0 y 0 $ y y 

jjLiLj dj J iy> dl dl 24 aUljr i a J Ul i (_£j-ol jjuu uj 

y y y y y y y y ** y •+ y 

^ 0 y y 9 0 9 9 y 0 y y 0 yy y y 

dll j >s\ n I ^jAj Axo_ 5 JJ 25 _jjLdu 


20- Some add to this chain «Uc or«Uj ori^ or J^u 

21- B, C, D and F: ti-jUijicijJij 

22- B, D omit word 

23- C and H omit word 

24- FI and I add: c,ijc 

25- C omits word- D: ijLi.1 s_,LCj (with alternative jitc >LiLj) 


89 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


20. Send down upon my heart, O Allah, O You who are the Most 
Subtly Benevolent, the Supremely Kind [who establishes True 
Welfare], 92 faith, tranquillity and peaceful calm, 91 that I may 
be of Those who have faith and whose hearts are at peace in the 
remembrance of Allah? 4 

21. Pour over me, O You who are the Superlatively Forbearing and 
Steadfast, to Whom all Gratitude is due for Your blessings, 
the steadfastness of those who have armed themselves with the 
unshakable resolve, certitude and empowerment of ‘How often 
has a small unit overcome a sizeable one, by the permission of Allah.’ 95 

22. Preserve me, O You who are the All-Preserving Guardian, to 
Whom all things are Entrusted, before me and behind me, on 
my right and on my left, above me and below me, through the 
ever-present, witnessing, assembling hosts of He has attendant 
angels, before him and behind him, watching over him by the 
command of Allah? 6 

23. Plant firm my feet, O Allah, O You who are the One who 
Stands [over every soul] , 97 the Forever Enduring, 98 as You made 
firm the one who said How should I fear what you have associated 
[with Him], when you do not fear [the fact] that you have established 
associates beside Allah ? 

24. Help me, O You who are the Best Protector, the Most Excellent 
Helper, 100 against the enemy, in the way that You helped the 
one to whom [his people] said Are you making fun of us?’ He 
replied, ‘I take refuge in Allah’? 01 

25. Support me, O You who Demand 102 and Prevail in Victory, 103 
with the strengthening support of Your Prophet Muhammad, 
upon whom be the blessings and peace of Allah, who was given 
the mighty and honoured rank of We have sent you as witness, 
bearer of good tidings aiid warner, so that you [all] may have faith in 
Allah? 04 


90 


Translation and Arabic text 


Ox 9 9 x x 9 


$ 9 o> o o x 


(j Inn UV Ij LaaV I ^ i U i L ■ a 1 1-,1 [j ^ 1 1 1 J jj lj V • 

Ji o o 9 9 99 & x o x x 9' ^ ' 35 x x 9 ' x x 35 x 

«lil I i a li'ij l^jia] ^jj.111 d)- 0 26< l~) \*\ t nl lj 

X xx 9 $ 5 X X X 35 x 0 x 9 9 ' S 9 9* x 35 xx o o x x 

(jjAi CjLuj 27 l^j£.jJj ^jjjJI J UXl J^j) < N I "l L Jj){ I XI L ^yjc. VN 

i*< 0 ^xxjlxoxxx XX x 0 OX Ox 

<_LI I (jjLi <la .-■ < l<~ <1 I < la <lfl 

X X XX X X ^ X ^ X X XX 


X o x x OxO x 35 x x 0x0 ^ 


0 >f X^ x ^ f.} <1 ? ? <1 0 X 0 X OX 0 X x 0 XX 

J-° oLl*-o <J Jjla. O-aj J-Oj jjfcj 

X X X X x »* x x»*x x»*xx 

1 »> 0X0 9 ' 9 ' OX Ox 0 X 0 X x Ox 

«dJ I j_a I ^j-a <jj) K 3 -t i <ULLi. «U Jj 

La i_iLjd ‘ a iV j jJjlkll Culi La£ ajIj Lj ajLS L a (j III Culij XV 

x ** ' x x ' x 

iV 0 9 0 ' 0 X o 35x x >1 XX x 0 9 0 ' 0 X 

4 JJ Li I 1 1 La»-j ^7s j-lL I 

x o x X o X XX ^ 35 x 0 XX xo X X o x 0 ^ Ox 

ji/i'i 28 a I J£.V I ^ylc. j u xi * 1 1 1 jvJU Lj ( ^yJ_j_aJ I ^ju L ^j j « xi *1 Ij V £ 

l* ffssstf? sf jl s s * i> 

<JJL j_j£.l JU IjjaS Ijj Vn I <d (_^AJI 

x 35 xx 0 xx 9 o> 35x 55 x ^ x ^ x £ x 9 x x 9 x x OlHxx 

a 1 1 1 1 j <uic <_U I ^ 1 1 x 1 .umi id 1 1 *) j i ii "i 1 i_JLc. L i_JUa L ^jjjlj V 0 

X ^ XXXXX X •* X 

IK 9 O 9 ? * V ,9 S * X X X Ox 0x35 ox ox i> s 9 

<UL ljj_aJ$jJ Ijajjj I j « V 1 1 nj Ijj&Ldu idliL-ujI lj I jaijj jajjua 29 d->,3-«J I 


26- B, F, K and M add Ajlij 
11 ■ C, H and M: 

28- F, G, H, I, J and IVF ^laci. D omits the phrase, but gives as alternative 

29- B, C, D, F, G, H: j>Ji 


91 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

26. Suffice me, O You who Suffice in every need, 105 who Restore [to 
Wholesomeness], 106 against [all] afflictions and ills, through 
the great benefit and lesson in If We had sent down this Qur’an 
upon a mountain , you would have seen it humbled , reduced to nibble 
out of the fear of Allah. 101 

27. Confer upon me, O You who Bestow Blessings Freely, who 
Provide Nourishment and Sustenance, the arising, arriving and 
accepting of the arranging, making easy and rendering suitable 
for use [contained] in Eat and drink of the provision of Allah} 00 

28. Enjoin on me, O You who are Wholly and Only One, 109 the 
Utterly Unique, 110 the [constant duty of the] word of Oneness, 
which You imposed upon Your beloved Muhammad, upon 
whom be the blessings and peace of Allah, when You said Know 
then that there is no god but Allah} 11 

29. Invest me, O You who are the Close Friend and Patron, the 
Supremely High, with Your close friendship, protective care 
and keeping, and flawless wholesomeness, through the utmost 
provision, favour and support of That is of the grace of Allah} 12 

30. Give me, O You who are Rich beyond need, the Noble who 
respond in Generosity [to all requests] , the honour of felicity, 
esteem, munificence and unconditional forgiveness, as You 
honoured Those who lower their voices in the presence of the 
Messenger of A lldh . 1 1 3 


92 


Translation and Arabic text 


jj Iji jj 3 L Ij p Ij jV I ^a Li L ^a li L ^ lj X~\ 

^ ^x -0 s 0 f $ s s 9 f s 9 sQ^s s ss ss s ^ O 9 s s s Os 0 / 

<111 <Lui^ L J i sl\ n 1.3>. ' Vj Li <Gj| J lj_A Liljjl 

OS Os 9 s 9 9 9 9 * $ S s 9 $ s s $ ss 0 *0 S 

Jj^=j jljj Lj t-jLfcj Lj ^ic. iL°b 

i a oo 9 - s o s 99 os 

LJ I ijjj L-° Ij-li j j~> ' " ' 


> 0 > s x S s s S o S Qs s s O Jj S' s s ^ s s s r s s O Qs s 

1 ,\-Q ~-k^i <lL.l.,L2k cto jj I I T\ 32 j 4 n K jj^.1 L jj^Ij L ^jiojJlj XA 

in £ j- s9$sOsOsso9 9 0s s Jls s ss 9 J j5 S 

33 <11 1 <11 'i <jl pla-li jjla iu~>. p i i nj <jic. <UI ^ 1 


Lo^LuJ lj 34 <jLc J lj <jll*JI I j <_iV_$iL ^Ja. 1 j Lj X^ 


L H 0 S 0 


3 ® <JJ I J I Aa !^ya dllj 35 jlj-ol jl.».',<J I jljjl 

s s s s s s s s s s 

SOS s s s s s S s£ s s s & 9 S sis s 0 0 SS 

SjajLaJlj <_aljDlj SjLj-JIj 6 jI. 3 i.uj.IL pjji L ^JLc. L X • 


• 0 0 9 S s 0 


£ S 0 S 0 ■ 


<11 1 Jtjajjj Jac. p^j I Jj-js I j)j ts\i i JjjJ I Jluoji I Li 


30- Some give J-uiVi instead of JjjVI. Some split the pair of Names, giving in 
varying order: »IjjVI L Jj^yi L 

31- C, E, C, H, J and M omit word- B, D and L give it after 

32- A, B, C, E, F, H and K give: liJ ai 

33- B, C, H, J and L omit verse tA 

34- Some omit this or the preceding word or change their order 

35- C, D and J add ja ^ 

36- F and L give instead till j-ii Jlj (Q- 57 21; 62 4) 


93 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

31. Turn to me, O You who Turn constantly in Forgiveness, the 
Clement, with pardon and counsel, so that I may be of Those 
who, when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves, remember 
Allah and ask for forgiveness of their wrong-doings - and who 
forgives wrong-doings save Alldh? m 

32. Seal my days, O You who are the All-Compassionate, the 
Most Merciful, with the finest conclusion [of] those who are 
delivered and [those] who are full of hope: O My servants who 
have transgressed against yourselves, do not despair of the mercy of 
Allah . 11S 

33. Bring me to dwell, O You who are the All-Hearing, the Ever- 
Near, 116 in a Garden prepared for the god-fearing: Their call 
therein is '’Glory to You, O Allah’, their greeting therein is ‘Peace’, 
and their call culminates in ‘ Praise belongs to Allah’ A 1 

O Allah, O Allah, O Allah, O Allah! 

O You who are Pure Beneficence, 

O You who are Pure Beneficence, 

O You who are Pure Beneficence, 

O You who are Pure Beneficence! 

O All- Compassionate One, O All-Compassionate One, 

O All- Compassionate One, O All-Compassionate One! 

O You who are Sheer Mercy, O You who are Sheer Mercy, 

O You who are Sheer Mercy, O You who are Sheer Mercy! 


94 


Translation and Arabic text 


9 $ ' ' j! " 0 9 ' 


Ijl ^jjjJI ,jj^V U.j < jj 3 37 p J~k L L ^jlc. i_ijj YN 

0 ' ' o 99 9 ' o ' o ' ' J 9 ' ' o 9 ' 9 o ' 9 " o ' 9 ' ' 9' ' 

I j jaA.'I 1 u la <11 1 ^ (j i nd I lj-olki jl <1 1 ti Li Ijlxs 

j> j> ' 9$> 9 O' 

38 <11 1 VI i_j jj jJ I jjjjLi 

x ^ ji ' ' $ ' ' o 9 9 ' ' 9 ' o ' ' 0 0 ' 

L 39 k jj^ljjlj <_ojLk 1 1 ! i j L L p'i~w lj YY 

ji ' o ' o 9 ' o ' o 9 O' " 9 ' o ' ' ji ' ' 

<11 1 < ^j-o I jialaj V (j I nVi I ^jJc. I jij_cu I ^jjjJ I ^ J Lie. 

x o 9 ' o ' ' ji9 o o ji 9 ?j>' 9 ' '9 ' ' ^ o " 

1 (j ^a-A^jC-J 4 1 t j 'Vi ^11 OAC. I 40 <J1^. L £j_a_cu L ^jj&ULM I j YY 

ji 9 O' ' o 9 ' o ' 9 __ 9 ' ' ' o 9 9 j> " $ 9 ji ' ' ' o 9 

<JJ J n ~i. II I ^a_aI^j£.J ^^Laai I ^ I < p p (j 111 dljlcA-U-U 


9 ji ' 9 ji ' 9 ji ' 9 ji ' 

dll L <111 L <111 L <111 L 


^iQ L £_ali L ^ilj L ^ilj L 


9 o ' '9 o ' '9 o ' '9 O' ' 

jLa^j L L L 


42 \ Lj L L ^ i ~\j L 


37- F, I and K give instead L v (4 4 C gives instead vfc bf^=- E 

38- H and J omit verse s\ 

39- H gives Ji atk^i j* ^ijij . I gives js A, B, E and K give jjjJi ^blij 

J^. C gives ^ 4 ^ oifl jjjJi jFj- 

40 - Some (including A, B, D and L) add jjl 
41 . A, B, E, F, C, l,J, Kand Ladd^jJi 

42- The copies vary in the number of repetitions of these Names- The Names 


95 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

I ask of You through the sacred sanctity of these Names, Verses 
and Words , 118 an authoritative strength that brings success , 119 a 
bountiful livelihood, a joyful heart, abundant knowledge, be- 
neficent works, a luminous grave, an easy account [on the Day 
of Reckoning] and a goodly portion in Paradise. May Allah bless 
our master Muhammad and his family and companions; may the 
peace of Allah be upon them, a plentiful peace, until the Day of 
Resurrection. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds. 


96 


Translation and Arabic text 


■ 0 ? ?'0 


oLKIIj CjLiVI^ p Log ijV 1 6J J& 4-o^^J 43 JjLcu Ij 

^ o' t 0' ' t "'tost ' t ' 0? 

Ijjji LJij 45 Ijli^ Lsjjj Ij/ i^i'i LLkLu 

£ ? t Q' ' t - f t f 0 ' 

IjjJLo Ijjij 47 Ijjjj ^LaCj 46 Laic.j 

t x 0 ' 0 to?'? ' ? ' ' 

IjojS ^ LLLj Ijjjjjj L 1 . 1 1 ~k j 

O'' ' " $'?'$' " ?jl $' ' 

4 i ~k i y-ij <jl Jn~\n Ij J 1 1 . i ^jJc. <UJ I ^ I i«-»j 

? ' ? 0 ' ' $' ' 

I j, yf\ Lq-lLlaU ^Lojj 

£ 0 ^ ^ 

od^ 1 fJi 

48 J^iaJLsJI i_jj <Jj iakjlj 


43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 


used also vary, with the occasional addition/substitution of e g- j— «b, j— iij 
and jj — j- Alongside the one represented here, another common version is 
as follows: dll L x 3 or 4; LjL»o.j Ljjb L x 1- At this point further text is 
added in l< (al-HisarT comments on fol-120a that he received this version 
through a chain connecting his shaykh to Ibn ArabT); it appears as an 
alternative in A and D- The version given here follows K with some 
amendments: 

■_u ii.V~> I V Q.fk (_$ J-® I jj-ujj (_£j-ii5 £fljl I Jjl.fl.~kjJ I <1-11 1 j> nil SjjjLij 


4 nfl 1 1 J}l=kj 6 jxl I ij Lftjk..i cLL, .i I j . j) i ur jAin^ . jJti L j-A L jJti Li .eLoj5£j , ’I'J . dl 

Jjjj j^k-i jvfl.jlr. k_3j^. V JjjjJI I dijLc Jjx ^ ' I* -v ' Jjl 4 a l-i a 1 1 OjjJka.j jc.j 

E, J, K and L add f+ui 


E and K add eJ j* J ji 

Some add or substitute ij^ and/or WJj. Phrase missing in J 
Phrase 1 _*> Ukj missing from C and H 

Phrase L*.* k^j missing from F, C, H and J; given as alternative in M 


Some copies give different expanded versions of the salawat 


97 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 


al-Dawr al-a'la 

al-muqarrib ila kulli maqam al-a'la 


Bismi-llahi-r-rahmani-r-rahim 


1. Allahumma ya Hayy ya Qayyum, bika tahassantu fa-hminl 
bi-himayati kifayati wiqayati haqlqati burhani hirzi amani 
bismi-lldh 

2. wa-adkhilnl ya Awwal ya Akhir, maknuna ghaybi sirri da’irati 
kanzi ma shd’a-lldh Id qivwata ilia bi-lldh 

3. wa-asbil 'alayya ya Halim ya Sattar, kanafa sitri hijabi siyanati 
najati Toa-'tasimu bi-habli-lldh 

4. wa-bni ya Muhlt ya Qadir 'alayya sura amani ihatati majdi 
suradiqi 'izzi 'azamati dhdlika khayrun; dhdlika min dydti-lldh 

5. wa-a'idhnl ya Raqlb ya Mujlb, wa-hrusnl fl nafsi wa-dlni wa- 
ahll wa-waladl wa-darl wa-mall, bi-kala’ati i'adhati ighathati 
wa-laysa bi-ddrrihim shay’an ilia bi-idhni-lldh 

6. wa-qinT ya Mani' ya Dafi' bi-asma’ik wa-ayatik wa-kalimatik 
sharra-sh-shaytani wa-s-sultan, fa-in zalimun aw jabbar bagha 
'alayya akh adhathu ghashiyatiin min r adhdbi-lldh 

7. wa-najjinl ya Mudhill ya Muntaqim min 'abldika-z-zalama al- 
baghln 'alayya wa a'wanihim, fa-in hamma ll minhum ahadun 
bi-su’ khadhalahu-llah wa-khatama 'aid sum' ihi wa-qalbihi wa- 
ja'ala 'ala basarihi ghishdwatan fa-man yahdThi min ba' di-lldh 


98 


Transliteration 


8. wa-kfinl ya Qabid ya Qahhar khadl'ata makrihim, wa- 
rdudhum 'annl madhmumln madh’umln madhurln bi-takhslri 
taghylri tadmlri fa-md kdna lahu min fi ’at in yansurunahu min 
duni-lldh 

9. wa-adhiqnl ya Subbuh ya Quddus ladhdhata munajati aqbil wa- 
Id takhaf; innaka mina-Tdminma fi kanafi-llah 

10. wa-adhiqhum ya Darr ya Mumlt nakala wabali zawali fa-qnti'a 
dabiru-Tqawmi-lladhma zalamii ; wa-l-hamdu li-lldh 

11. wa-aminnl ya Salam ya Mu’min sawlata jawlati dawlati-l-a'da’i 
bi-ghayati bidayati ayati lahumu-l-bushrafi-Thayati-d-dunya wa- 
fi-l-dkhira ; Id tabdlla li-kalimdti-lldh 

12. wa-tawwijnl ya 'Azlm ya Mu'izz, bi-taji kibriya’i jalali sultani 
malakuti 'izzi 'azamati iva-ld yahzunka qawluhum ; inna-l- 

' izzata li-lldh 

13. wa-albisnl ya Jalll ya Kablr, khil'ata ijlali ikmali iqbali fa-lammd 
ra’aynahu akbarnahu wa-qattana aydiyahunna wa-qulna hdsha 
li-lldh 

14. wa-alqi ya 'Aziz ya Wadud 'alayya mahabbatan minka fa- 
tanqada wa-takhda'a lT biha qulubu 'ibadika bi-l-mahabba wa- 
1-ma'azza wa-l-mawadda, min ta'tlfi taltlfi ta’llfi yuhibbunahum 
ka-hubbi-lldh ; wa-lladhina dmanu ashaddu hubban li-lldh 

15. wa-azhir 'alayya ya Zahir ya Batin athara asrari anwari 
yuhibbuhum iva-yuhibbiinahu adhillatin ' dla-l-mu minin a izzatin 
' ala-Tkdfirm yujdhiduna ft sabtli-lldh 

16. wa-wajjihi-llahumma ya Samad ya Nur wajhl bi-safa’ i jamali 
unsi ishraqi fa-in hdjjuka fa-qul aslamtu ivajhi li-lldh 


99 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

17. wa-jammilnl ya Badl'a-s-samawati wa-l-ard, ya Dha-l-Jalali wa- 
1-Ikram, bi-l-fasaha wa-l-balagha wa-l-bara'a wa-hlul 'uqdatan 
min lisdnJ, yafqahii qaivli bi-ra’fati rahmati riqqati thumma 
talmu juluduhum. wa-qulubuhum ild dhikri-llah 

18. wa-qallidnl ya Shadlda-1-batsh ya Jabbar bi-sayfi-l-hayba wa- 
sh-shidda wa-l-quwa wa-l-mana'a, min ba’si jabaruti 'izzati wa- 
ma-n-nasru ilia min ' in di-lldh 

19. wa-adim 'alayya ya Basitya Fattah, bahjata masarrat rabbi- 
shrah ll sadrl, wa-yassir ll amrl bi-latd’ ifi 'awatifi a-lam nashrah 
laka sadrak wa-bi-asha iri bashd’iri wa-yawma’ idhin yafrahu-l- 
mu minima bi-nasri-llah 

20. wa-anzil allahummaya Latlfya Ra’uf bi-qalbl-l-Iman wa- 
l-itmlnan wa-s-saklna, li-akuna mwYA-lladhlna dmanu iva- 
tatma ’ innu qulubuhum bi-dhikri-lldh 

21. wa-afrigh 'alayya ya Sabur ya Shakur sabra-lladhlna tadarra'u 
bi-thabati yaqlni tamklni kam minfi’atin qalTlatin ghalabat 
fi’atan kathTratan bi-idhni-lldh 

22. wa-hfaznl ya Hafiz ya Wakll min bayni yadayya wa-min khalfi, 
wa-'an yamlnl wa-'an shimall, wa-min fawql wa-min tahtl, bi- 
wujudi shuhudi junudi lahu mu dqqibdtun min bayni yadayhi wa 
min khalfihi, yahfazunahu min amri-lldh 

23. wa-thabbiti-llahumma ya Qa’imya Da’im qadamayya, kama 
thabbatta-l-qa’il wa-kayfa akhdfu md ashraktum iva-ld takhdfuna 
annakum ashraktum bi-lldh 

24. wa-nsurnl ya Ni'ma-l-Mawla wa-ya Ni'ma-n-NasIr 'ala-1- 
a'da’i nasra-lladhl qlla lahu atattakhidhund huzuwd ; qdla a'udhu 
bi-lldh 


ioo 


Transliteration 


25. wa-ayyidnl ya Talib ya Ghalib, bi-ta’yldi nablyika Muhammad 
salla-llahu 'alayhi wa-sallam, al-mu’ayyad bi-ta'zlzi tawqlri innd 
arsalndka shahidan wa mubashshiran wa-nadhird, li-tu’mimi bi-lldh 

26. wa-kfinlya Kaflya Shafl, al-adwa’a wa-l-aswa’a, bi-'awa’idi 
fawa’idi law anzalnd hadha-l-qur’dna 'aid jabalin la-ra’aytahu 
khdshi 'an mutasaddi 'an min khashyati-lldh 

27. wa-mnun 'alayya ya Wahhab ya Razzaq bi-husub wusub qabub 
tadblri tayslri taskhlri kulu wa-shrabu min 7'izqi-lldh 

28. wa-alzimni ya Wahid ya Ahad kabmata-t-tawhld kama alzamta 
hablbaka Muhammad salla-llahu 'alayhi wa-sallam, haythu 
ayAva. fa-' lam annahu la ildha illa-lldh 

29. wa-tawallanl ya Wally ya 'Ally bi-l-wilaya wa-1-' inaya wa-r- 
ri'aya wa-s-salama bi-mazldi Iradi is'adi imdadi dhdlika min 
fadli-lldh 

30. wa-akrimnl ya Ghanly ya Karim bi-s-sa'ada wa-s-siyada wa- 
1-karama wa-l-maghfira kama akramta -lladhTna yaghudduna 
aswatahum ' in da rasfili-lldh 

31. wa-tub 'alayya ya Tawwab ya Halim tawbatan nasuha, b-akuna 
mina-lladhina idhdfa'alii fdhishatan aw zalamu anfusahum 
dhakaru-lldh fa-staghfaru li-dhunubihim wa-man yaghfiru-dh- 
dhunuba illa-lldh 

32. wa-khtim ll ya Rahman ya Rahim bi-husni khatimati-n-najln 
wa-r-rajlnj« ' ibddiya-lladhTna asrafu ' aid anfusihim la taqnatu 
min rahmati-lldh 

33. wa-askinnl ya Sami' ya Qarlb jannatan u'iddat b-l-muttaqln, 
da ' wdh um fihd subhdnaka-lldhumma wa-tahiyyatuhum fThd 
sald?n, wa-dkhiru da'wdhum ani-l-hamdu li-lldh 


IOI 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 
ya Allah, ya Allah, ya Allah, ya Allah 

ya Nafi', ya Nafi', ya Nafi', ya Nafi' 

ya Rahman, ya Rahman, ya Rahman, ya Rahman 

ya Rahim, ya Rahim, ya Rahim, ya Rahim 

wa-as’aluka bi-hurmati hadhihi-l-asma’ wa-l-ayat wa-l-kalimat 
sultanan naslra, wa-rizqan kathlra, wa-qalban qarlra, 
wa-'ilman ghazlra, wa-'amalan barlra, wa-qabran munlra, 
wa-hisaban yaslra, wa-mulkan fi-l-firdawsi kablra, 
wa-salla-llahu 'ala sayyidina Muhammad wa-'ala alihi 
wa-sahbihi wa-sallama tasllman kathlra, 
ila yawmi-d-dln, wa-l-hamdu li-llahi rabbi-1- 'alamln 


102 


Notes to Chapter 3 


Notes 


1. The following discussion draws only on Arabic sources: further examples in 
Ottoman Turkish arise in Yaznia Bagijlar 2934 and Haci Mahmud Efendi 3950, for 
example. 

2. See F, fol. 144b. The signification of wird here is that of a specified time de- 
voted regularly to such practice. The wird is thus often understood to comprise a set, 
supererogatory personal devotion observed at specific times, usually at least once 
during the day and once more at night. See ‘Wird’, p. 209. 

3. See Haci Mahmud Efendi 4061, Esad Efendi 1442, Dugiimlu Baba 506, 1. 

4. Beyazid 7880 recommends reading it three times in the morning. M recom- 
mends that it be read a little before the dawn prayer, D and F after it. 

5. Nafiz Pa§a 702: for a complete cycle, see for example fols. 4a-14b. 

6. G, M, Arif-Murad 58, §azeli 106, Genel 43, the latter added in a different 
hand. 

7. For example, Esad Efendi 1442 : the Dawr is added at the end of K. al-Rashahdt 
al-amvariya ft sharh al-awrdd al-akbariya, itself on the margin of the Awrdd. 

8. The great majority of copies of the Awrdd likewise appear without the prayer. 
To mention an early example, Veliyuddin 1833 encompasses (alongside the Awrdd) K. 
Mawdqi' al-nujum, K. al-Isrd’ (copy dated AH 977, made in Damascus at the shrine of 
Ibn 'Arab! by Jibrll b. Zayn al-'Abidln al-Ghazzi), extracts from al-Futuhat al- 
MakkTya and parts of the Tarjuman al-ashwaq, plus a supplication for the Day of 
'Arafa, from al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya. 

9. Beyazid 7880 recommends that Hamid Wahhdb be recited 76 times before each 
reading of the prayer. M recommends beginning with the salawdt and then repetition 
of ya Hayy,ya Qayyum 174 times. Genel 43, fol. 29b details the following ‘keys’ to the 
prayer: 

O Allah! O You in whose hand are the keys of the secrets of the unknowns, and 
the lamps of the lights of the hearts! I ask You through our master Muhammad 
(may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him), to open for me the locked 
doors of these treasures, and to unveil for me the realities of these symbolic 
allusions. Yd Hu yd man Hu {7 times}. I ask You to bless the Sun of the gnostic 
sciences of Your Names, the Source of the secrets of Your light, who is the 
noble original Light-Tree and the radiant outpouring of the Origin, and the 
one who possesses the knowledges of the chosen {al-'uliim al-istifd’Tya), under 
whose banner the prophets march. [I ask you to bless hint] by the number of 
those You have created and sustained, from whom You have taken life and to 
whom You have given life, until You resurrect those You have annihilated. Yd 
Latif{\29 times}, al-saldt wa'l-saldm 'alaykayd rasiil Allah {29 times}, Alldhu latlf 
bi- r ibddihi yarzuqu manyashd’ wa huwa’l-QawT al-AzTz {10 times}. 


103 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

10 . Haci Mahmud Efendi 4137 and Genel 43 recommend reciting siirat al- 
Inshirah and the salawdt three times on completion. Haci Mahmud Efendi 4146 
recommends reciting Yd la ildha ilia Allah al-Rafi' jaldlatan IS times. One copy on 
which our copy ‘I’ draws gives a special supplication at the end, the only one in our 
sources that encompasses specific mention of the prayer’s author as saintly interces- 
sor. The supplication proceeds thus (fol. 64a): 

O Allah, by Your permission and grace grant that the spiritual reality ( ruhdnlya ) 
of the Muhammadan Heir, the shaykh and my master Muhyl al-DlnMuhammad 
b. 'All al-'Arabi (may Allah sanctify his secret) be of support to us, that it inter- 
cede and mediate for us with the Envoy of Allah (may the peace and blessings 
of Allah be upon him), and that it bring us glad tidings of the Compassionate 
Beatitude. Expand my chest, elevate my standing, and provide for me my sus- 
tenance without debit or credit, and be for us not against us, O You from Whom 
all help is sought. Amen. By Your Mercy, O Most Merciful of the Merciful. 

11 . An example of such introductory and concluding recommendations currently 
circulating in print in Damascus is that provided by Abu’l-Yusr 'Abidin, referred to 
earlier. 

12 . See C, fols. 3b-5a. 

13 . The Arabic plurals qurana’, tawdbi' , marada and zawabi ' require clarification. 
Used in the Qur’an eight times, qarln (pi. qurana ’) denotes an inseparable or intimate 
companion, commonly referring to man’s spirit companion. According to Q 4: 38, 
Satan can be a qarln (he indeed follows men everywhere), and Q 43: 36 describes God 
assigning ‘a satan’ to man as a qarln when he turns away from the remembrance of 
Him. See also Q 50: 27. The oldest exegetical tradition posits a qarln at the side of 
every human in the form of a satan or jinn who tempts him to evil (even prophets have 
such a satan-companion, but the Prophet Muhammad converted his own to Islam). 
At the same time, there is at his side an angel, who induces him to good. These figures 
should not be confused with the recording angels. See ‘Qarin’, El 2 , 4, pp. 643-644. 
There are several hadith references to the qurana’-. see for example Muslim, 4, 260 
and 50: 69 [after A.J. Wensinck,H Handbook of Early Muhammadan Tradition (Leiden, 
1927)]. 

Tdbi'a (pi. tawdbi') refers to a jinn female, who loves a man and follows him every- 
where: it does not appear in the Qur’an. Marid (pi. marada') denotes someone who is 
insolent in rebellion: it is used in the Qur’an thus, and applied by extension to Satan 
(it is also a bad jinn’s name). Zawba'a (pi. zawabi') denotes a suddenly rising wind that 
whips up whirling sand or dust clouds, but also a terrible and malicious jinn believed 
to preside over such windstorms and hurricanes. 

14 . On the jinn in the Qur’anic worldview and in Muslim folklore, see The 
Message of the Qur’an, tr. and explained by Muhammad Asad (Bristol, UK, 2003), 
Appendix III; ‘Djinn’, El 2 , 2, pp. 546-549. 

15 . Suggested here are the kinds of property associated with al-Shadhill’s popular 
Hizb al-bahr, which asks that the sea be ‘subjugated’ to those who are crossing it. 


104 


Notes to Chapter 3 


16 . Associated with the evil eye, envy is recognised as a source of harm in Q 113: 
5. The phrase md sha’a Allah (As God wills!) is used as protection against it: see 
Padwick, Muslim Devotions, p. 88. 

17. A popular belief that the jinn could inflict various illnesses, especially those 
involving paralysis (such as hemiplegia) is noteworthy here. See ‘Djinn’, p. 548. 

18 . On the shahada as the desired final utterance at the moment of death and the 
visitation and questioning of the two angels Munkar and Naklr on the first night in 
the tomb (according to the hadith), see Padwick, Muslim Devotions, pp. 132-133, 278— 
279, respectively. 

19 . qarin al-su’: literally ‘the one who associates with evil’ or ‘the one for whom 
evil is an associate’, Satan. According to Q 4: 38, ‘the one for whom Satan is a com- 
panion; what an evil companion he has! ’ 

20 . This is a loose rendering of umm al-sibyan. Classical dictionaries suggest this 
may denote baby colic, or epilepsy. According to a hadith the Prophet said ‘When a 
man has a newborn child and utters the adhan (the call to prayer) in his right ear and 
the iqdma (the second call) in his left ear, umm al-sibyan will not affect the child.’ 
Cited by al-Ghazall under ‘Etiquette Concerning Having Children’, in Marriage and 
Sexuality in Islam: A Translation of al-Ghazali's Book on the Etiquette of Marriage from 
the Ihya’, tr. Madelain Farah (Salt Lake City, UT, 1984), p. 114, including details of 
the hadith. Note finally the association of the root meaning of the word with the 
(sterile) east wind. 

21 . Literally the red wind: al-rih al-ahtnar. The general association in this list of 
jinn (themselves fashioned out of ‘the fire of scorching winds’ according to Q 15:27) 
with winds that cause ill health is noteworthy. For examples of the Prophet’s prayers 
for protection from the evil of the wind, see A. H. Farid, Prayers of Muhammad 
(Lahore, 1999), p.233. 

22 . al-'uqud, literally knots; also compacts or bargains struck. Note also 'aqada 
nasiyatahu: he tied his forelock in preparation to attack or do harm to someone, and 
Q 113:4, where the ‘blowing upon knots (' uqad )’ denotes occult activities. 

On the widespread persistence in Muslim societies of the belief in and practice of 
magic (and the role in it of the jinn, under the command of a practitioner), advice 
concerning how to protect oneself from its effects and attitudes towards it among 
various contemporary Muslim authorities, see for example Remke Kruk, ‘Harry 
Potter in the Gulf: Contemporary Islam and the Occult’, British Journal of Middle 
Eastern Studies 32: 1 (2005), pp. 47-73; http://www.muttaqun.com/jinn.html and 
http://www.islamawareness.net/Jinn/. Texts of Qur’an and hadith of course affirm 
the reality of magic, but tend to refer to it in condemnatory terms (with some excep- 
tions). 

23 . Literally: ‘an army difficult to repel’. 

24 . On the notion of [spiritual] breaths in Ibn 'Arabl’s thought, see William C. 
Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-Arabi’s Metaphysics of Imagination (Albany, 
NY, 1989), p.402 n. 18. In the present context, the reference is possibly to ‘the fra- 
grances of nearness to God’. Chittick cites Ibn 'Arab! thus: ‘When the Gnostics smell 


105 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

the perfume of these breaths... they come to know a divine person who has the mys- 
tery which they are seeking and the knowledge which they want to acquire...’ 

25 . To take an example from Damascus, al-Budayrl’s chronicle of daily life in the 
city during a period of al-Damunl’s lifetime records floods, severe cold, earthquakes 
and windstorms (as well as swarming locusts, the spread of leprosy and devastating 
outbreaks of plague). See al-Budayrl, Hawadith Dimashq al-yanmiTya , pp. 52, 56-57, 
223, 228, for example. 

26 . As Michael Gilsenan, Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt: An Essay in the Sociology 
of Religion (Oxford, 1973), pp. 33-34 points out in relation to the notion of baraka, ac- 
cording to the traditional Muslim view there is ‘a whole complex of forces, thought in 
an ultimate sense to constitute as well as to govern the world. There are maleficent 
powers to be warded off by the saints, by amulets, talismans, verses of the Qur’an, the 
virtuous life, and trust in God. And where the balance turns against you there is the 
final radical explanation of the mystery of God’s will.’ 

27 . As Padwick, Muslim Devotions, pp. 23, 25 points out, use of the term hizb 
evinces an ‘unacknowledged tendency. . .towards semi-magical protection’, while the 
term hirz (often used as synonymous with hizb) in the title of a prayer can indicate its 
use as a talisman or amulet. A hizb or hirz often comprises a selection of Qur’anic 
verses and small supplications printed in a tiny booklet which can be easily carried on 
the person: this may be referred to by a further synonym, hijdb. A very well-known 
example printed as a tiny booklet and frequently carried is al-Hisn al-hasw min kaldm 
rabb al-'dlamm (‘The Impregnable Fortress front the Words of the Lord of the 
Worlds’), compiled by Shams al-Dln M b. M al-Jazarl (d. 833/1429): see below. Use of 
the term ta'wTdh (and other derivatives from the same root) to denote protective or 
‘refuge-taking’ prayers, often worn as amulets, must finally be noted (these include 
the final two suras of the Qur’an, al-mu avrwidhatan) . See further Padwick, Muslim 
Devotions, ch. 6; ‘Tilsarn’, El 2 , 10, pp. 500-502; ‘Tamima’, El 2 , 10, pp. 177-178. For 
examples of the Prophet’s prayers in the formula of seeking refuge in God, see Farid, 
Prayers of Muhammad, pp. 245-249. 

28 . Indeed, as Padwick, Muslim Devotions, p. xxii notes, some are simply strings of 
Qur’anic verses ‘with more or less connection of subject’, put together for devotional 
use. 

For an introduction to perceptions concerning the power of the Word of God and 
prayer, and the general spheres of use to which sufi prayers have been put, see Carl 
Ernst, The Shambhala Guide to Sufism (Boston and London, 1997), pp. 89-91. 

29 . Compare with McGregor, Sanctity and Sainthood, pp. 35, 74. 

30 . Eight different prayers by al-Shadhili appear in our sources, the most fre- 
quent being Hizb al-bahr (which has been described as the most famous of all ahzdb: 
see ‘Hizb’, p. 513) and Hizb al-nasr. On Hizb al-bahr see McGregor, Sanctity and Saint- 
hood, pp. 34-35; on the use of ahzab attributed to al-Shadhili in the contemporary 
Tunisian Shadhiliyya, see idem, ‘A Sufi Legacy in Tunis’, pp. 269-271. 

31 . Abu Madyan Shu'ayb b. al-Husayn al-Ansarl (d. 549/1198), a seminal figure of 
sufism in Muslim Spain and North Africa and profoundly influential on Shadhili and 


106 


Notes to Chapter 3 

Qadiri traditions: on hint see The Way of Abu Madyan: The Works of Abu Madyan 
Shu'ayb, tr. and compiled by Vincent J. Cornell (Cambridge, 1996); El 2 , 1, pp. 137— 
138. Known fully as Hirz al-aqsdm, this is not included in Cornell’s collection of Abu 
Madyan’s works. 

The juxtaposition of prayers associated with the Shadhili tradition (that of Ibn 
Mashlsh can also be mentioned in this context) with those of Ibn 'Arab! reflects the 
strong appreciation within this tradition for the legacy of Ibn 'Arabl. Perhaps also 
relevant in this regard is the appearance of muqatta'dt in some versions of the prayer 
ending, as form a prominent feature of al-Mahdawi’s salavidt (see Pablo Beneito and 
Stephen Hirtenstein, ‘The Prayer of Blessing [upon the Light of Muhammad] by 
'Abd al-'AzIz al-MahdawI’, JMIAS XXXIV (2003), p.28 n.43 and p. 30 n.47), and of 
Hizb al-bahr (the latter encompassing the same letter clusters that appear in some of 
the Dawr endings). 

32. For an example of the former, see L, fols. 133 onwards; for the latter, see 
Hasan Husnu Paga 583 fob 212b, where the prayer is followed by a supplication con- 
cerning plague reported from Abu Hanlfa. §azeli 106 presents a particularly interest- 
ing range of ahzab and ahrdz with many different uses, including soothing crying 
babies and meeting enemies, for example. 

While individual prayers have been associated with specific spheres of protection 
there does not appear to have been a strict division among them, and copyists may 
have drawn on a common pool of properties. Thus the description of the Davir’s 
properties in Diigiimlu Baba 490, fols. 31b-32a, appears also in G, fols. 66a-67a, 
where it applies to Abu Madyan’s Hirz al-aqsam, which prayer is omitted from the 
former compilation (on the relationship between these two compilations see Appen- 
dix): the copyist simply replaces hirz with Hizb al-wiqdya throughout the description 
of properties. Note also in this regard the comprehensive scope of the properties 
attributed to al-Hisn al-hasm, set out in the preamble to it. 

33. Particularly in D, but al-Damunl also states his intention in his commentary 
to ‘bring out some of the talismans and secrets’ of the prayer (see C, fol. 3b), and 
provides some squares towards the end of his work. On talismanic ‘magic squares’, 
typically consisting of 9 or 16 compartments incorporating numbers or letters repre- 
senting words (for example the letters of the Name Allah written in a different order 
four times), see ‘Tilsam’, p. 501; ‘Wafq’, El 2 , 11, pp. 28-31. 

34. For example Nafiz Paga 702 adds on the margin of eight out of fourteen copies 
of the prayer presented a supplication that begins thus (towards the end of the prayer, 
for example fol. 25b) and ends with surat al-Ikhlas (note that the same supplication is 
woven into the prayer before the end salavidt in I): 

I establish my protection from all of His creatures in a fortress whose founda- 
tion is Id ildha ilia Allah, whose wall is Muhammad rasiil Allah, whose key is Id 

havila via la quvmta illdbi'lldh al-Aliy al-Azim... 

M follows his recommendation concerning the prayer’s recitation (see n. 9 above) 
with this supplication (fol. 109b): 


107 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

This is a magnificent, blessed protective prayer. In the Name of God the Crea- 
tor, the Greatest: a protection against what I fear and am wary of. There is no 
power for any creature before the Creator. Keif Ha ’ Yd’ 'Ayn Sad. Ha’ Mini Sin 
Qdf All faces submit to the Living, the Self-Subsisting [Q 2 : 111]. May whoever 
perpetrates oppression fail. God is sufficient as Protector and He is the Most 
Excellent Trustee. 

35 . As McGregor, ‘A Sufi Legacy in Tunis’, p.267 suggests, prayers perhaps ac- 
quire ‘an added spiritual dimension’ when recited: see also pp. 269-270. 

36 . D, p. 6. See also The Hizbu-l Wiqdyah of Muhyiddin Ibn ArabT. Compare with 
Padwick, Muslim Devotions, pp. 278-279. 

37. See for example F, fol. 144b; D, p.6; Dugumlii Baba 506, fol. 2a and I, fob 
62a. 

38. Yazma Bagijlar 2934, fob 39b. D, p.6 points to its benefits for ‘reaching the 
ranks of spiritual mastery’ (b ulugh mardtib al-siybda). 

39. See B fob 2a; F, fob 144b. 

40 . See K, fob 51b; F, fob 144b; D, p. 3. 

41 . Al-Hisarl indeed refers to the prayer as al-Hizb al-qur’dm. See K, fob 51b. It 
is noteworthy that some copyists mark Qur’anic verses in red (e.g. G), while others 
mark the Divine Names thus (e.g. I). A few add the numerical value of each Name 
close to it (e.g. Hasan Husnu Pa§a 583, fols. 21 lb-2 12b). 

The preamble to al-Hisn al-hasin furnishes an example of this intense focus on 
the power of Qur’anic verses and Divine Names, the former as a remedy ( shifd ’) and 
vehicle for mercy, the latter as a medium for supplication, in the context of a popular 
hirz. 

42 . Certain commentaries elaborate at length on the choice, location and signifi- 
cance of Divine Names in the prayer: their treatment must form the subject of a 
separate study. 

43. See C, fols. 5a-b; B, fols. 3a, 4a; I, fob 62a (the explanation in the latter is 
given on al-Qushashl’s authority). Qur’an 7: 180 and Muslim, Dhikr, no. 6, respec- 
tively, are cited. 

44 . C, fob 5a. It is a fundamental principle of all prayerful supplication {dud’) for 
requests to be addressed to God through the evocation of His Names and Attributes, 
for His Essence is unknowable and unapproachable, and He cannot be understood in 
an affirmative way in respect of it: the particular Names and Attributes used thus 
define and shape the supplication. This pattern assumes a sophisticated expression in 
the Dawr, as illustrated below. See ‘Du'a”, El 2 , 2, p. 618; Padwick, Muslim Devotions, 
pp. 104-107. 

45. B, fob 3b. He cites the similitude of someone who seeks the good offices of 
one of the ministers serving the most powerful king on earth in seeking the corpse of 
a dog or a donkey: the king will surely respond by throwing him out. 

46 . Note that al-Damuni repeats in his preamble and concluding remarks the 
need for ‘complete inner belief’, reflecting a central principle elaborated in discus- 
sions of the conditions and rules ( adab ) of prayer {dud’), that contribute towards a 


108 


Notes to Chapter 3 

guarantee of efficacy: for it to be received by God, one must pray with a feeling of 
conviction that the prayer will be answered. See ‘Du'a” p. 618. On the common em- 
phasis of sincere intention in the preamble to prayers see also Padwick, Muslim Devo- 
tions, pp. 52-54. This emphasis is well illustrated in the preamble to al-Hisn al-hasTn. 

47. B, fol. 2b; I, fol. 62a, for example. 

48. See ibid. By way of further encouragement for its use without a guide, I and B 
cite the saying ‘If you are not one of them, then emulate them, for there is success and 
salvation (falah ) in emulating the noble.’ 

49. Variants are denoted by the term nuskha (copy) in the margin. 

50. Among others, examples of such inaccuracies arise in the following copies 
and verses of the Dawr: Averse 15, C verse 23, and H verse 7. 

51. Given that four chains of transmission pass through Ibrahim al-Kuranl, the 
apparent source of H, the question arose as to whether there might be consistency 
between H, B, C, D and F (and possibly also I, which apparently emanated from al- 
Qushashi, from whom al-Kuranl received the prayer). In the event the attempt to 
identify an al-Kuranl (or any other) ‘family’ or ‘version’ of the prayer was not felt to 
be a fruitful approach (by way of illustration, we would cite the existence of differ- 
ences even between H and H2: see Appendix). 

52. Copyists can forget to distinguish the text of the prayer from that of the 
commentary (often done using red ink or a red over-line), or mark parts of the com- 
mentary thus as prayer text. Confusion can also arise when an unmarked word from 
the prayer text appears in a gloss on another word in it, or when the commentator’s 
explanations require him to alter the constructions in which specific words or phrases 
appear, and the associated vowels. Examples arise in B, fols. 9a, 23b, 24b, 27b, 34a; C, 
fob 76a; and D, p. 37. 

53. This All- Comprehensive Name denotes ‘not only the Essence of God but 
also the sum total of every attribute that the Essence assumes, in relationship to the 
creatures.’ See Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, p.20. For an introduction to the 
Divine Names and Attributes in Ibn 'Arabl’s thought see ibid., pp. 8-11; 33 ff. 

54. We also comment in passing on similarities with the Awrad, but no system- 
atic or thorough comparison is attempted. In addition, we point out examples of 
resonances with certain traditional prayers of the Prophet. 

It should be noted that we do not attempt a detailed analysis of the content, struc- 
ture, imagery and literary composition of the prayer, and the commentaries identified 
earlier are not applied to such an end. It is felt that the associations within each verse 
(between verbs used to express supplications, Names invoked, Qur’anic texts and 
word chains), and progressions within and between particular clusters of the prayer’s 
verses, are best left to the reader’s close contemplation. 

55. Renderings of Qur’anic text, indicated in the translation in italics, are loosely 
based on A. J. Arberry, The Koran Interpreted (Oxford, 1991), which has been exten- 
sively adapted as appropriate. The numbering of verses used in Qur’anic references 
follows that in The Holy Qur’an: Translation and Commentary by A. Yusuf Ali (n.p., 
n.d.). 


109 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

56 . The traditional list according to a well-known version of a hadith transmitted 
by Abu Hurayra can be found in Abu Hamid al-Ghazall, The Ninety-nine Beautiful 
Names of God: al-Maqsad al-asndfi shark asm a’ Allah al-husnd, tr. with notes by David 
B. Burrell and Nazih Daher (Cambridge, 1999), pp. 49-51. Another version of this 
list, also given on the authority of Abu Hurayra, substitutes other Names for some of 
the ninety-nine in the first one: see pp. 167-169. 

57 . Some Names appear in neither version of the list but are noted as such in the 
Qur’an or derived from expressions associated with the Divine therein. See ibid., 
pp. 167-169. 

58 . Ibn 'Arab!, K. Kashf al-ma'na 'an asmd’ Allah al-husnd, ed. and tr. Pablo 
Beneito (Murcia, Spain, 1997): 2 nd revised edn. 

59 . See ibid., p. 11. For elaboration, see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, 
pp. 21-25 (on takhalluq) and pp.48, 60 (on ta'alluq). The same terms were used by al- 
Mahdawl and apparently first expounded by AbuMadyan: see Beneito and Hirtenstein, 
‘The Prayer of Blessing [upon the Light of Muhammad] by 'Abd al-'AzIz al-Mahdawi’, 
p. 30 n.49. 

60 . There does not appear to be any direct correlation between the structure of 
the prayer as a whole and the inclusion (and order of inclusion) of particular prophets, 
however. It is also noteworthy that supplications by prophets in the Qur’anic text are 
used in the prayer in an indirect manner, as illustrated by verses 17 and 19, in contrast 
with such usage as arises in Hizb al-bahr, for example: see McGregor, Sanctity atid 
Sainthood, pp. 44-46. 

61 . On Ibn 'Arabl’s projection of the true relationship between Divine Beauty 
and Majesty, and the human response to these, see his K. al-Jaldl wa’l-jamdl, tr. by 
R. T. Harris, JMIAS VIII (1989), pp.5-8. 

62 . For this reason we do not use the translation ‘God’. 

63 . Another example of the use of such word chains in the genitive case in a 
text attributed to Ibn 'Arab! arises in Khutba ukhrd [Another Preface] (§ehit Ali 1341, 
fols. 405b-406a, part of a collection of Ibn 'Arabl’s works dated AH 724). Here we 
see, for example, bi-wisdli ittisdli jamdli kamdli and iftitdhi arvidhi irtiydhi misbdhi 
ravidhi riydhi and idraji ibraji zujdji sirdji wahhdji. The author thanks Stephen Hirten- 
stein for this information. 

64 . Every sura of the Qur’an but one is prefaced by ‘In the Name of Allah, the 
All-Compassionate, the Most Merciful’, and the Dawr, like all other all prayers, opens 
with it. Both this and a contraction of it (‘In the Name of Allah’, referred to in short- 
hand as the basmala) permeate Muslim oral and written expression. On its application 
before action as a consecration, its quality as a word of power, and its popular use as 
an amulet (its description in this verse as a hirz is noteworthy), see Padwick, Muslim 
Devotions, pp. 94 ff. 

65. Q 18: 39, in full: ‘Why did you not say, on entering your garden, “As God 
wills! There is no power save in God!”, If you see me less than you in wealth and 
children.’ Part of the parable of the two men, one of them boasting to the other that 
he has been given greater wealth and strength, declaring that he did not believe his 


no 


Notes to Chapter 3 

garden would ever perish, nor that the Resurrection would come to pass. On observ- 
ing his attitude, his companion asked why he did not acknowledge God’s generosity 
and power, for He may invert their fortunes, and ruin his garden, as indeed 
happened. 

Like the basmala, the phrases ma shd’a Allah and la quwata ilia bi’lldh (and the ex- 
panded version of the latter la hawla wa la quwata ilia bi'lldh, referred to in shorthand 
as the hawqala) also permeate Muslim expression. Note that the hawqala is described 
as a treasure ( kanz ) also in the Sunday morning prayer in the Awrad, where it is also 
tied to the unknowable ( min khazd’ in al-ghayb ): see Ibn 'Arabl, Wird, p. 7. 

66. Al-Sattdr is not one of the ninety-nine Names, but appears in supplications 
and devotional literature. For example, the Wednesday morning prayer in the Awrad 
encompasses anta Sattar al-'uyiib (You are the One who Veils shortcomings), and 
invokes God through this attribute (yd Sattar): see Ibn 'Arabl, Wird, p. 32. 

67. Q 3: 103, in full: ‘Hold fast to the bond of God, together, and do not scatter; 
remember God’s blessing upon you when you were enemies, and He brought your 
hearts together, so that by His blessing you became brothers. You were on the brink 
of a pit of Fire, and He delivered you from it; thus God makes clear to you His signs, 
so haply you will be guided.’ The verse is addressed to those who have attained to 
faith. 

68. The Name al-Muhlt appears in the alternative version of the list of ninety- 
nine given on the authority of Abu Hurayra, and the expression muhit appears several 
times in the Qur’an in reference to the Divine, as in Q 2: 19, 3: 120, 8: 47, 41: 45, 85: 
20, 4: 108, 4: 126 (e.g. ‘God encompasses everything’; ‘God encompasses the things 
they do’). 

69. Q 7: 26, in full: ‘Children of Adam! We have sent down on you a garment to 
cover your nakedness, and as a thing of beauty; and the garment of godfearing (libds 
al-taqwd) - that is better; that is of the signs of God; haply they will remember.’ 

70. Q 58: 10, in full: ‘Conspiring secretly together is of Satan, that the believers 
may sorrow; but he will not hurt them anything, except by the leave of God. And in 
God let the believers put all their trust.’ Q 58: 9 urges the believers not to conspire 
secretly together in sin, enmity and disobedience to the Prophet, but in piety and 
godfearing. 

The root 'awadha, which signifies seeking God’s protection or refuge, is of course 
always applied in relation to the seeking of protection against Satan, as in the formula 
a'udhu bi’llah min al-shaytdn al-rajJm. On refuge-taking or protection seeking 
(ta‘ dwwudh) in Muslim prayer, see Padwick, Muslim Devotions, ch. 6. 

71. Al-Ddf is not one of the ninety-nine Nantes, but is used in supplications and 
devotional literature (for example, yd Ddfi r al-bald ’: O You who Repel misfortune). 
The Tuesday morning prayer in the Awrad encompasses idfa' 'anm kayd al-hasidin 
(‘Repel from me the deceitful plots of the envious!’), and the Wednesday morning 
prayer invokes God through this attribute (yd Daft'): see Ibn 'Arabl, Wird, pp.25, 32, 
respectively. 

72. Q 12: 107, in full: ‘Do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no 


III 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

enveloping of the chastisement of God, or that the Hour shall not come upon them 
suddenly when they are unaware?’ Q 12: 106 provides the reference: ‘And the most 
part of them believe not in God, but they associate other gods with Him.’ Ghdshiya 
refers specifically to the Resurrection (which covers and encompasses all of man- 
kind), or to Hellfire, which will overspread the faces of the unbelievers. 

This verse of the prayer is the first of several in which an imprecatory aspect is 
expressed, through which the supplicant seeks harm for those who justly deserve it. 

73. Q 45: 23, in full: ‘Has thou seen him who has taken his caprice to be his god, 
and God has led hint astray out of a knowledge, setting a seal upon his hearing and 
his heart, and laying a cover on his seeing? Who then will guide him, after God? 
What, will you not remember? ’ Note that the part of this Qur’anic verse cited in the 
prayer forms the second part of a conditional clause (thus pointing to a hypothetical 
future): in the Qur’anic verse it describes something past. 

74. Q 28: 81, in full: ‘So, We made the earth to swallow him and his dwelling and 
there was no host to help him, apart front God, and he was helpless.’ This refers to 
Qarun, one of the people of Moses to whom God had given great treasures, but who 
became insolent towards his people and boastful. The prayer captures the signifi- 
cance of Qarun’s destruction both for the supplicant and for those who have mis- 
treated him. (Qarun is often identified with the Biblical Korah, but this has been 
called into question. See The Message of the Qur'an, p. 672 n. 84.) 

Note the occurrence of the phrase ‘driven away in blame and routed’ ( madh 'liman 
madhuran ) in Q 7: 18, addressed to Iblis on his expulsion from Paradise. 

75. Al-Subbuh is not one of the ninety-nine Names. It appears twinned with al- 
Quddus in the Wednesday evening prayer of th eAwrdd: see Ibn Arabl, Wird, p. 29; 
further Ibn Arabl, The Seven Days of the Heart, p. 87. 

76. Q 28: 31, in full (beginning with a continuation of the divine address to Moses 
from within the burning bush): “‘Cast down your staff!” And when he saw it quiver- 
ing like a serpent, he turned round retreating, and did not turn back. “Moses, come 
forward and fear not; for surely you are among those who are secure.’” 

77. Q 6: 45. Truncated here, the Qur’anic verse continues: ‘the Lord of the 
worlds’. It appears at the end of a series addressed to the Prophet, explaining how 
messengers were sent to communities before him, how they forgot what they had 
been reminded of, and how they were suddenly seized and confounded. 

The pairing of verses 9 and 10 of the Dawr is noteworthy. Inverse 9, the supplicant 
requests what is desirable and beneficial for himself; in verse 10, he seeks what is 
harmful for his enemies. Benefit bestowed by the Divine (through the Name al-Ndf) 
pivots on the provision of that which is enjoyable ( ladhdha , mentioned in verse 9) 
according to Ibn Arabl, while the Names al-Ndfi' and al-Ddrr are twinned opposites. 
See Ibn Arabl, K. Kashf al-ma'na, p. 178. 

78. Q 10: 64, in full: ‘For them are good tidings in the life of this world and in the 
hereafter. There is no changing the words of God; this is the mighty triumph.’ Q 10: 
62-63 provides the reference: ‘Surely God’s friends - no fear shall be on them neither 
shall they sorrow. Those who believe, and are godfearing - . . .’ 


112 


Notes to Chapter 3 

79. Q 10: 65, in full: ‘And do not let their saying grieve you. Indeed the honour 
and glory belong to Allah altogether; He is The All-Hearing, The All-Knowing.’ 
The Qur’anic verse is addressed to the Prophet Muhammad regarding his dealings 
with the polytheists. 

80 . Q 12: 31, in full: ‘When she heard of their malicious talk, she sent to them and 
prepared for them a banquet and gave to each of them a knife. “Come forth and at- 
tend to them”, she said. And when they saw him, they so admired him that they cut 
their hands, saying “May we be saved by God! This is no mortal; he is no other than 
a noble angel.’” See earlier discussion for the Qur’anic context. 

81 . Q 2: 165, in full: ‘Yet there be men who take to themselves compeers apart 
from God; they love them as if it were love for God; but those who believe are more 
ardent in love for God. O if the evildoers might see - when they see the chastisement 
- that power altogether belongs to God, and that God is terrible in chastisement.’ 

82. Q 5: 57, in full: ‘O believers, whosoever of you turns from his religion, God 
will assuredly bring forth a people He loves, and who love Him; [they are] soft to- 
wards the believers, hard on the unbelievers, striving in the path of God, not fearing 
the reproach of any reproacher. That is God’s bounty; He gives it unto whom He will; 
and God is All-embracing, All-knowing.’ 

83 . Q 3: 20, in full: ‘So if they dispute with you, say, “I have surrendered myself 
[my face] ( viajhT ) to God, and whosoever follows me ! ” And say to those who have been 
given the Book and to those who have not, “Have you surrendered [to Him] ? ” If they 
have surrendered, they are rightly guided; but if they turn their backs, your duty is 
but to deliver the Message. And God sees His servants.’ (Note that i oajh, literally 
‘face’, denotes by extension one’s will or self.) Q 3: 19 refers to disputes between the 
Prophet and the People of the Book: ‘The true religion with God is Islam. Those 
who were given the Book were not at variance except after the knowledge came to 
them, being insolent one to another. And whosoever disbelieves in God’s signs, God 
is swift at the reckoning.’ 

84 . Al-BadT' (one of the ninety-nine Names) appears twice in the Qur’an as here 
(Q 6: 101 and 2: 117). 

85 . Q 20: 27-28. This is part of a supplication made by Moses in response to the 
divine instruction to go to the transgressing Pharaoh. 

Note the resonance in this part of the prayer verse with a request that appears in a 
prayer taught by the Prophet to All to help in memorising the Qur’an, thus: Al- 
lahumma badT' al-samdwati wa’l-ard dhd’l-jaldli wa , l-ikrdm...as’aluka bi-jaldlika...an 
tutliqa bi-hi lisdnT. . . For the full text and details of the hadith, see Farid, Prayers of 
Muhammad, p. 227. 

86. Q 39: 23, in full: ‘God has sent down the most excellent discourse as a Book, 
consistent within in its oft-repeated [truths] , at which shiver the skins of those who 
fear their Lord; then their skins and hearts soften to the remembrance of God. That 
is God’s guidance, whereby He guides whomsoever He will; and whoever God leads 
astray has no guide.’ 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

87 . This is not one of the ninety-nine Names. Q 85: 12 gives ‘Surely yonr Lord’s 
assault is terrible (inna batsha rabbika la-shadTd)’. See also Q 44: 16. 

88. Q 3: 126, in full: ‘God ordained this but as a glad tiding to you, and that your 
hearts might thereby be at rest. There is no help to victory except front God, the All- 
Mighty; the All-Wise.’ The Qur’anic context is the battle of Uhud; the immediate 
reference is to the reminder that God’s help would be forthcoming, as it was at Badr 
(two clans among the Prophet’s forces at Uhud had been on the point of losing heart 
and joining the deserters). See also Q 8: 10, referring to the battle of Badr. 

89 . Q 20: 25-26, part of a supplication uttered by Moses, on receiving the divine 
instruction to go to the transgressing Pharaoh, continued by the Qur’anic verses 
included in prayer verse 17: see n. 85 above. 

90 . Q 94: 1. The opening verse of surat al-Inshirah, used in times of difficulty. 
Revealed very soon after Q 93 during the early years of his mission and a time of 
considerable trial for the Prophet, it reassures hint of God’s continuing help. The 
juxtaposition in the prayer verse of this Qur’anic verse with Q 20: 25, conveying 
Moses’ request for the ‘expansion of his breast’, is noteworthy. 

91 . Q 30: 4-5, in full (including 3): ‘The Byzantines have been vanquished in the 
nearer part of the lands; after their being vanquished, they will be victorious in a few 
years. To God belongs the Command before and after. That day the believers shall 
rejoice in the victorious help of God; He helps whomsoever He will, and He is the 
All-Mighty, the All-Compassionate.’ ‘That day’ is understood to be a prediction of 
the battle of Badr which took place 8-9 years later, during which the Muslims would 
rejoice at their decisive victory over the unbelievers of Quraysh. (It refers also to the 
victories of Heraclius over the Persians: Badr coincided with a stage in these.) 

92 . This pair of Names appears (in reverse order) in the Wednesday morning 
prayer of the Aim-ad. See Ibn 'Arabl, Wird, p. 32. 

93 . On itmlndn and sakina, the latter denoting both God-inspired peace of mind 
and the presence of God, see Padwick, Muslim Devotions, pp. 122-125. 

94 . Q 13: 28. Truncated here, it ends: ‘Surely in God’s remembrance the hearts 
are at rest.’ 

95 . Q 2: 249, uttered on the tongue of the small band of believers who went out 
with Saul (Talut) to meet Goliath (Jalut) and his hosts, then routed them by the leave 
of God. In full: ‘And when Saul set out with his forces he said “God will try you with 
a river; whoever drinks of it is not of me, and whoever does not taste it is of me (as are 
those who scoop just a mouthful).” But they drank of it, except a few of them. When 
he crossed it, together with those who believed along with him, they said “We have 
no power today against Goliath and his forces!” Yet those who were certain that they 
would meet God said “How often has a small unit overcome a sizeable one, by the 
permission of God! God is with those who are patient in adversity.’” Note that Q 2: 
250 continues with their supplication on meeting Goliath and his forces, thus: ‘Our 
Lord! Pour out over us steadfastness, make firm our feet and give us aid against the 
people of the unbelievers.’ The prayer verse 21 uses the same language and imagery 
as arises in their supplication ( afrigh ' alaynd sabran wa thabbit aqddmand...). 


Notes to Chapter 3 

96. Q 13: 11, in full: ‘He has attendant angels, before him and behind him, watch- 
ing over him by the command of God. God changes not what is in a people, until they 
change what is in themselves. If God wills evil for a people, there is no turning it 
back. Apart from Him, they have no protector.’ Q 13: 9-10 explains the encompass- 
ing of the unseen and the visible by the Divine Knowledge, with the following effect 
(achieved through the surrounding recording angels): ‘Alike of you is he who con- 
ceals what he says and he who proclaims it, he who hides himself in the night, and he 
who sallies by day.’ 

Note the resonance in this prayer verse with a request that appears in a prayer 
attributed to the Prophet, which he reportedly recited every morning and night: Al- 
lahumma ahfazni min bayna yadayya via min khalft v 'a 'anyammi via ’an shimdlT via min 
faviql... For details of the hadith see Farid, Prayers of Muhammad, pp. 150-151. 

97. Al-Qd’ im is not one of the ninety-nine Names but appears, for example, in Q 
13: 33: ‘What, He who stands over every soul for what it has earned? And yet they 
ascribe to Allah associates ( a-fa-man huvia qd’im ’ala kulli nafsin bi-md kasabat via 
ja'alu li’lldhi shurakd’)’. 

98. Al-Da’im appears in the alternative list of ninety-nine Names given on the 
authority of Abu Hurayra: see al-Ghazall, The Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God, 
p. 167. 

99. Q 6: 81, in full: ‘How should I fear what you have associated [with Him], 
when you do not fear [the fact] that you have established associates beside God, 
concerning which He has not sent down on you any authority? Which of the two 
parties has better title to security, if you have any knowledge ? ’ This is on the tongue 
of Abraham, while he was disputing with his people concerning his repudiation of 
their polytheism. 

100 . These two Names appear thus together in Q 8: 40 (see also 22: 78); for fur- 
ther examples of references to God as the Protector of those who believe, see Q 47: 11 
and 3: 150. They are not among the ninety-nine Names. 

101 . Q 2: 67, in full: ‘And when Moses said to his people “God commands you to 
sacrifice a cow.” They said, “Are you making fun of us?” He replied, “I take refuge in 
Allah lest I should be one of the ignorant.” ’ The context is the well-known exchange 
between Moses and his people, which culminated in their sacrificing the cow. 

102 . Al-Talib is not one of the ninety-nine Names. It arises in the Wednesday 
morning prayer of the Avirdd ( anta...al-Tdlib viaH-matlub) for example: see Ibn 'ArabI, 
Wird, p. 31. Cf. Q 58: 21. 

103 . Al-Ghdlib is not one of the ninety-nine Names but is used in the Qur’an of 
the Divine in 12: 21, thus: ‘Allah prevails in His purpose, but most men know not’ (via 
Allah ghdlib ’aid amrihi via Idkin akthar al-nds laya' lamun). Cf. Q 58: 21. 

104 . Q 48: 8-9, in full: We have sent you as witness, bearer of good tidings and 
Warner, so that you [all] may have faith in God and His Messenger, and succour Him 
and reverence Hint, and that you may give Him glory dawn time and evening.’ 

105 . Al-Kdfi appears in the alternative list of ninety-nine Names given on the 
authority of Abu Hurayra: see al-Ghazali, The Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God, 


The Prayer for Spiritual Elevation and Protection 

pp. 167. In the sense of sufficiency, the root verb appears of the Divine several times in 
the Qur’an in relation to His sufficiency as a Guardian (waktl), a Reckoner ( hasib ), a 
Helper ( naslr ), a Protector (wall), as One who knows ('alTni), and as a Witness (shahid), 
for example. See for example Q 4: 81, 33: 39, 25: 31, 4: 45, 4: 70, 4: 166; also 33: 25. 

106. Al-Shdf is not one of the ninety-nine Names: the root is used in the Qur’an 
to characterise its own contents (e.g. Q 17: 82 and 41: 44); see also Q 10: 57; 9: 14. 

107. Q 59: 21. Truncated here, the verse ends: ‘And those similitudes - We strike 
them for men; haply they will reflect.’ 

108. Q 2: 60, in full: ‘And when Moses sought water for his people We said, 
“Strike with your staff the rock”, and there gushed forth from it twelve fountains; all 
the people knew now their drinking place. “Eat and drink of the provision of God, 
and do not make mischief in the earth, spreading corruption.”’ The part of this verse 
quoted in prayer verse 27 is on the tongue of Moses. 

109. This Name, which appears in the traditional list of ninety-nine, is always 
twinned in the Qur’an with al-Qahhdr. See Q 40: 16, 39: 4, 38: 65, for example. 

110. Al-Ahad appears in the alternative list of ninety-nine Names given on the 
authority of Abu Hurayra: see al-Ghazali, The Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God, 
p. 167. (See also Q 112: 1: ‘Say: “He is Allah, One.”’) 

111. Q 47: 19, in full: ‘Know then that there is no god but God, and ask forgive- 
ness for your sin, and for the believers, men and women. And God knows your com- 
ings and goings and your lodging.’ The word of Oneness (kalimat al-tawhid.) is 
shorthand for the first part of the shahada. 

112. Q 12: 38, in full thus: And I have followed the creed of my forefathers 
Abraham, Isaac (Ishaq) and Jacob (Ya'qub). Not ours is it to associate others with 
God. That is of the grace of God to us, and to all mankind; but most men are not 
thankful.’ This is on the tongue of Joseph, in the context of a discussion of their 
dreams with his fellow prisoners: he had been imprisoned following his refusal to 
bow to the demands of his employer’s wife. 

Note that the three terms in the phrase bVl-wilaya wa’l-' indya wa'Tri'aya appear 
together also in the Sunday morning prayer of th eAwrad, thus: bi-'ayn al-rahma wa’l- 
' indya wa’l-hifz wa’l-ri'dya wa’l-ikhtisds wa’l-wildya. See Ibn 'Arab!, Wird, p. 9. 

113. Q 49: 3, in full: ‘Surely those who lower their voices in the presence of the 
Messenger of God, those are they whose hearts God has tested for godfearing; they 
shall have forgiveness and a mighty wage.’ The verse appears in a sequence advising 
the believers how they should behave in the presence of the Prophet and towards each 
other. 

114. Q 3: 135. Truncated here, after a pause the Qur’anic verse ends: ‘and who 
do not knowingly persist in the things they did.’ This verse appears in a sequence 
describing the righteous, whose reward will be Paradise. Note that the Qur’anic 
verse begins with ‘And’, which is omitted in prayer verse 31. 

115. Q 39: 53, in full: ‘Say! “O My servants who have transgressed against your- 
selves: do not despair of the mercy of God. Surely God forgives sins altogether; 
Surely He is the All-Forgiving, the All- Compassionate.”’ 


Ii6 


Notes to Chapter 3 

116 . Al-Qarlb appears in the alternative list of ninety-nine Names given on the 
authority of Abu Hurayra (see al-Ghazall, The Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God, 
p. 167), and is used of the Divine in Q 2: 186, 11: 61 and 34: SO (in the final case, in 
the pair here: Sami' QarTb). 

117 . Q 10: 10. Truncated here, it ends: ‘Lord of the worlds.’ Q 10: 9 provides the 
reference: ‘Surely those who believe, and do righteous deeds, their Lord will guide 
them for their belief; beneath them rivers flowing in gardens of bliss.’ 

‘A Garden prepared for the god-fearing’ is a contraction of a description appear- 
ing in Q 3: 133: ‘And vie with one another, hastening to forgiveness from your Lord, 
and to a Garden whose breadth is as the heavens and the earth, prepared for the 
god-fearing.’ 

118 . Perfect and complete, the power of the Word of God is repeatedly acknow- 
ledged in prayer and invocation (see for example ‘Tamima’, p. 177; Padwick, Muslim 
Devotions, p.86). The Prophet is reported to have said that whoever recites the 
formula a'iidhu bi-kalim at Allah al-tdmmdt min sharri md khalaq in the morning and 
the evening will never come to harm: for details of the hadith see Farid, Prayers of 
Muhammad, p. 150. Ibn 'Arab! advised use of this formula (incorporating the word 
kullihd after kalimdt Allah al-tdmmdt) by the traveller alighting for rest during the 
night, to protect his night-camp from harm: see Ibn 'Arabl, al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya 
(Beirut, n.d.), IV, p. 505. 

119 . Sultan nasir arises as the object of a request in Q 17: 80 (which furnishes a 
much-used supplication), thus: ‘And say: “My Lord, lead me in with a sincere ingoing, 
and lead me out with a sincere outgoing; grant me from You an authoritative strength 
that brings success.’” 



Appendix 


Manuscript copies and chains of transmission 


Copies A-I used in presenting the Arabic text are detailed below. 
With respect to chains of transmission, the lengthy epithets at- 
tached to figures are omitted unless they are of specific help for the 
purposes of identification: titles and positions are retained. Of these 
chains, to our best knowledge only D and G have been printed. 

A. Haci Mahmud Efendi 3950 

Al-Jundl commentary (in Ottoman Turkish) dated AH 1280: 52 
fols., some vowels. Al-Jundl claims that this chain (fols. 50b-51a) 
encompasses the Dawr and ‘all of Ibn 'Arabl’s other awrad and writ- 
ings’. He provides an ijdza in the Dawr and the salawat of Ibn 'Arab! 
to Abd al-Nafi' Efendi. 

Jundl Zade Muhammad Amin al- 'Abbas, Mufti of Damascus - his 
father Muhammad Efendi al-Jundl ~ 'Umar al-Baql ~ Muhammad 
Kamal al-Dln al-Siddlql ~ his father Mustafa al-Bakrl al-Siddlql ~ 
'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI ~ Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI ~ Badr al-Din 
al-GhazzI ~ al-qadl Zakarlya al-Ansarl ~ hafiz Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl 
~ Ibrahim 'Abd al-Wahid al-Tanukhl ~ Qasim b. 'Askar (sic) ~ Ibn 
'Arabl 

B. Diigiimlii Baba 506 

Al-Tafilatl commentary (in Arabic) copy dated AH 1251 (Medina): 
30 fols., with some vowels. Al-Tafilatl claims that this chain (fob 3a) 
encompasses the Dawr and ‘all of Ibn 'Arabl’s writings’. lie adds that 
he has chains of authorities other than this one, but does not specify 
them. 

Muhammad al-Tafilatl al-Khalwatl, Mufti of Jerusalem ~ his teacher 
Mustafa al-Kubra (sic) al-Khalwatl and his shaykh Muhammad 


Appendix 


b. Salim al-PIanafl (sic) al-Misrl; the latter two ~ their shaykh 
Muhammad al-Budayrl al-Dimyatl ~ his shaykh Mulla Ibrahim al- 
Kuranl al-Madanl ~ his shaykh Ahmad al-Qushashi al-Dajanl al- 
Madanl, via his chain to Ibn 'Arabl 

C. Haci Mahmud Efendi 4212 

Al-DamunI commentary (in Arabic) undated: 83 fols., no vowels. 
Chain appears fob 3a. 

Muhammad Mahmud b. 'All al-Damunl ~ his teacher Mahmud 
al-Kurdl al-Kuranl ~ Muhammad b. al-shaykh al-Salim al-HafnawI 
(sic) ~ Mustafa al-Bakrl ~ Mulla Ibrahim al-Kurdl al-Kuranl al- 
Madanl ~ Ahmad al-Qushashi al-Dajanl, via his chain to Ibn 'Arabl 

D. Al-QawuqjT commentary 

Printed version in Arabic (Damascus, AH 1301), copy of Placi Mah- 
mud Efendi 4213: 160 pp., with few vowels, ending in a commentary 
on the salaivdt of Ibn 'Arabl (pp. 106 f£). Al-Qawuqjl explains that 
he transmits the Daivr ‘like Ibn 'Arabl’s other resplendent works’ 
through this chain (pp. 3-4). 

Muhammad b. Khalil al-Qawuqjl al-TarabulusI ~ Yasln b. al-qutb 
'Abdallah al-Mlrghanl al-Makkl ~ Muhammad Tahir Sunbul ~ his 
father Muhammad Sa'ld Sunbul ~ Muhammad Tahir al-Kurdl ~ 
his father Ibrahim al-Kuranl al-Kurdl ~ Safi al-Dln al-Qushashi ~ 
Zayn al- 'Abidin al-Tabari ~ his father 'Abd al-Qadir b. Muhammad 
b. Yahya ~ his grandfather Yahya al-Tabari al-Makkl ~ al-hafiz 'Abd 
al-'AzIz b. al-hafiz 'Umar b. Fahd ~ his father ~ al-Jamal Muhammad 
b. Ibrahim al-Murshidl ~ Abu Muhammad 'Abdallah b. Sulayman 
al-ShinawizI ~ Radi al-Dln al-Tabari al-Makkl ~ Ibn 'Arabl 

E. Haci Mahmud Efendi 4053 

Copy of prayer alone, undated: 5 fols. with full vowels. Chain (fol. 
5a) added in a different hand, viz. that of 'All Efendi, granting an 
ijdza to read the Daivr to Ahmad Muzaffar b. Mustafa Mas'ud. 

'All Efendi b. Sulayman b. al-shaykh Mustafa b. al-shaykh 'Abd 
al-Karlm (may be crossed out) 'Umar, teacher in Dar al- 'Aliya ~ 


120 


Manuscript copies and chains of transmission 


'Abdallah SidqT al-Diyarbakrl, also called al-Qirmanl {or, 'Abdallah 
Sidql ~ al-Diyarbakrl, also called al-Qirmanl} ~ his brother Muham- 
mad Zanql{?} ~ Isma'll Idanjakl in Medina {al-mujdwir ft) ~ Ibrahim 
the grandson {of} 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI ~ his grandfather 'Abd 
al-Ghanl al-NabulusI ~ his shaykh Najm al-Dln al-GhazzI ~ his fa- 
ther Badr al-GhazzI ~ al-hifz al-Suyutl ~ al- Shams Muhammad b. 
Muqbil al-Halabl ~ Abu Talha al-HarawI al-Zahidl (sic) ~ al-Sharaf 
al-Dimyatl ~ Sa'd al-Dln Muhammad b. al- Shaykh al-Akbar ~ his 
father Ibn 'Arabl 

F. Re§id Efendi 1051 

Personal compilation of prayers, salawdt, Qur’anic verses, supplica- 
tions, poems (including Ka'b b. Zuhayr’s famous Bdnat Sudd), an 
alphabetical list of the names of the Companions who fought at Badr 
(compiled apparently at the request of a ruler), fragments from al- 
Busayrl and al-Suyutl, a hizb by Abu’l-Hasan al-Shadhill, a list of 
the Prophet’s names, his wives and a summary of the signs of the 
Mahdi drawn from the hadith. The hand throughout is apparently 
that of Muhammad Musawwid Zade al-Tarabzunl. No vowels, 160 
fols. Note that fol. 144a carries the date AH 1169 (the Dawr begins 
on fol. 144b). (The earliest date in the compilation is 1159; the latest 
is 1171.) The chain appears on fol. 145a. 

Muhammad al-shahlr bi-Musawwid Zade al-Tarabzunl ~ 
Ibrahim ~ Khayr al-Dln ~ Muhammad al-mashhur bi-Kamil Zade 
al-Tarabzunl ~ 'Abd al-Rahman al-Mawsill ~ his shaykh Fath Allah 
al-Mawsill ~ his shaykh Khalil al-Baghdadl al-sufl ~ Ibrahim al- 
Madanl al-sufl ~ Safi al-Din Ahmad b. Muhammad al-sufl ~ his 
shaykh Abu’l-Mawahib Ahmad b. 'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus al-'AbbasI 
al-ShinnawI then al-Madanl al-sufl ~ his father 'All b. 'Abd al- 
Quddus ~ his shaykh 'Abd al-Wahhab b. Ahmad al-Sha'rawI al-sufl 
~ his shaykh Zayn al-Din Zakarlya b. Muhammad al-qadl al-faqlh 
al-sufl ~ Abu’l-Fath Muhammad b. al-QaymanI{?} al-Maraghl al- 
sufl ~ his shaykh Sharaf al-Dln Isma'll b. Ibrahim 'Abd al-Samad 
al-Hashiml al-'Uqayll al-Jabartl al-Zabldl al-sufl ~ Abu’l-Hasan 'All 
b. 'Umar al-Wanl al-sufl ~ Ibn 'Arabl 


Appendix 


G. Laleli 1520 

Beautiful gold-embellished compilation in a single hand of prayers 
attributed to Ibn 'Arab! (the Aw rad, Dawr al-a Id, Hizb al-ahadlya , 
Tawajjuh waqt al-sahar , , Tahstn ) followed by a prayer attributed to 
Abu Madyan and a list of the names and dates of death of the rightly 
guided caliphs and the imams of the main four Sunni fiqh jnadhdhib : 
70 fols., dated AH 1164 (f. 67b). The introduction gives an ‘open’ 
ijdza (to anyone wishing to read the texts in question) and a chain 
which appear to be associated with the entire contents of the com- 
pilation of ‘awrdd and adhkdr\ (See manuscript frontispiece; Beneito 
and Hirtenstein, The Seven Days of the Heart, pp. 174-175, giving a 
translation and discussion of this ijdza and chain. We give the chain 
below for the sake of completeness). The Dawr text (fols. 31a-36a) 
is very clear and has full vowels. (Note that, sometimes omitting 
some of the smaller texts, Dugiimlu Baba 490 and 489 and Had 
Mahmud Efendi 4179, the last used by Beneito and Hirtenstein, all 
printed facsimiles, are versions of Laleli 1520, retaining the ijdza and 
chain.) 

Muhammad al-Madanl b. Sa'd al-Dln al-Basrl ~ Muhammad b. 
'All al-'AlawI al-Yamanl ~ 'Abd al-Shakur al-Mu'ammar ~ Shah 
Mas'ud al-Isfara’Inl al-Mu'ammar ~ 'All al-QunawI ~ Ibn 'Arabl 

H. Hamidiye 1440 

Compilation in a single hand of works by Ibrahim b. Hasan al- 
Kuranl: Majmuat rasd’il, including Maslak al-ta'rif bi-tahqiq 
al-taklif ’ did mashrab ahl al-kashf waTshuhiid al-qd’ilTn bi-tawhid al- 
wujud, 1 200 fols., addressing theological issues relating to the doc- 
trine of wahdat al-wujud. Contents recorded from AH 1086 to 1094 
in al-Kuranl’s presence in Medina by a disciple, several of them in 
al-Kuranl’s home on the outskirts of Medina 2 and one at the rear 
of al-Haram al-Sharif al-NabawI (the Prophet’s Noble Sanctuary) 
there. 3 The Dawr (fols. 3 lb— 32b) is the only prayer in this collection 
and the only text not by al-Kurani. It has few vowels. Note that the 
copy of the text ending on fol. 31a is dated AH 1089 (and made at 
al-Kuranl’s house on the outskirts of Medina), which is likely also to 


122 


Manuscript copies and chains of transmission 

be the date of the Dawr copy, which it can be presumed was recorded 
from al-Kuranl alongside his own works. 

It is noteworthy that Ragib Pa§a 1464 (193 fols.) is a second com- 
pilation of the same overall title as H, in a different hand from the 
latter: there is no evidence in this case that the scribe was al-Kuranl’s 
disciple. It seems that al-Kuranl requested that a second copy of H 
(which we can call H2) be made after that compilation had been 
completed in 1094. Some texts thus give the same details of time/ 
place as texts in H. Others then add a ‘final copy’ date some five or 
six years later. The Dawr (fols. 3 la-32 b) 4 follows on the same page 
on the end of a text by al-Kuranl concerning which it is recorded 
that the rough copy was made from al-Kuranl in his house on the 
outskirts of Medina in AH 1089 and the final one copied out in his 
house adjacent to Bab al-Rahma of the Prophet’s Mosque in AH 
1094. 5 The Dawr is followed (fol. 32b) by a verse from al-Shafi'I, an 
anonymous supplication and an untitled and un-attributed portion 
of Ibn 'Arabl’s Tuesday morning wird. 

I. Pertev Pa§a 644 

Compilation in a single hand of works by or attributed to Ibn 'Arab! 
(K. al-Hu, K. al-Haqq, K. al-Jaldla , K. al-Ba, K. al-Nasd’ ih, R. al- 
Anwar) plus various other texts, including a fragment from al-Sulaml 
and a prayer by Abu’l-Hasan al-Shadhill. The Dawr (fols. 62b-64a) 
is prefaced by a discussion of its properties. Undated, but the preface 
suggests that this version was received from al-Qushashl. 

J. Murad Buhari 320 

Personal compilation ofprayers, talismans, poems, etc. dated AH 1203 
(fol. 127a) in the hand of, and signed by Muhammad b. Muhammad 
b. 'Abdallah al-Hadl. The Dawr (fols. 60b-63a) is without vowels. 

K. Izmirli Hakki 3635 

Compilation in a single hand of prayers (including al-Saldt al-kubrd 
attributed to Ibn 'Arab! and prayers by al-Shadhill) and accompany- 
ing commentaries, 160 fols. Commentary on the Dawr by Husayn 


123 


Appendix 


b. Isma'll b. Mustafa al-LIisari (fols. 51b— 120b, the text of the prayer 
repeated fols. 12 lb— 125b), entitled Kashf al-kurub wa fath jamT ' al- 
abwdb wa kashf al-lughub. Copy dated AH 1282 (fob 125b), but the 
preamble has the author report that he wrote the commentary in 
AH 1205 (fob 51b). (Copy A 3470 [University of Istanbul Library] is 
incomplete and undated.) 

L. Esad Efendi 415 

Collection in a single hand of Ottoman Turkish and Arabic religious 
texts and prayers (including the hirz of Abu Madyan), 161 fols. The 
Dawr (fols. 1 58b— 161a) has some vowels and is dated AH 1220. 

M. Resid Efendi 501 

Compilation in a single hand of prayers by Ibn 'Arabl ( Hizb al- 'drif 
bPlldh, Du'd’ asmd’ Allah al-husnd, Hizb al-nur. ; the Awrdd, Salawdt 
sharifa ) and others (including those by 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jllanl, al- 
ShadhilT, 'Abd al-Ghanl al-NabulusI, 'Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha'ranl, 
al- Shaft 'I and Imam 'All), as well as anonymous supplications and 
protective prayers, all in one hand, 126 fols. Possibly dates to the 
lifetime of al-NabulusI, i.e. before AH 1143, as the copyist, possibly 
his disciple, refers to him twice in terms that suggest he was still 
alive (e.g. fob 94a). The Dawr (fols. 109b— 1 1 lb) has full vowels and 
plentiful marginal alternatives. 

Alongside these copies, particular attention was paid in producing 
the text to two copies with full vowels: Nafiz Pas a 702 and Ankara 
Milli 489. 

In addition to those referred to throughout our text and notes, the 
following copies were also consulted: Izmirli Hakki 1516 (undated), 
Esad Efendi 1405 (undated), Ulu Cami 936 (dated AH 1194), Esad 
Efendi 3430 (undated). 


124 


Notes to Appendix 


Notes 


1. Knysh, ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani’, p.41 n. 10 refers to a copy of the same title in what 
may be a comparable collection: Majmu'a, Yahuda Collection, #3869. 

2. For example fols. 29a, 30a-b, 34b. Texts here end with comments such as the 
following (fol. 29a): ‘Our shaykh the author, may God cause us to benefit from him, 
said: “The rough copy was completed at noontime on Tuesday 11 th Safar 1086, in my 
home in the outskirts of al-Madlna al-Munawwara : the best prayer and blessing be 
upon the most excellent of its inhabitants. . 

3. See fol. 46a, dated 1088: his disciple (the scribe) here asks God to keep al- 
Kurani safe, to preserve him and give him strong health. 

4. The text of the Dawr in H2, which has many vowels, is identical to H with the 
exception that the scribe fails to incorporate four marginal additions, on one occasion 
adds his own insertion in the margin (sirr after majd in verse 4), and chooses yahdihi 
in verse 7 (given in the margin in H) over the erroneous yahdT (given in the text in H). 
These differences do not merit its separate inclusion in preparing our text, but they 
do serve to point up the extent to which copyists and scribes have felt justified in 
showcasing a ‘personal’ version of the prayer. 

5. For example, fol. 31a has: ‘The author, may God cause us to benefit from him, 
said: “The rough copy was completed before noon on Thursday 30 th Muharram at 
the beginning of 1089 in my house on the outskirts of al-Madlna al-Munawwara... 
the final copy (lit. its copying out and embellishment) was completed on the after- 
noon of Saturday the 22 nd of Rajab 1094 in my house adjacent to Bab al-Rahma of the 
Prophet’s Mosque.’” Similar examples arise in fols. 30a and 26a. 

Note that the latter part of this compilation encompasses two additional texts by 
al-Kurani (one of them recorded in 1084 and another after his death) and two by al- 
Ghazall. From f. 95a (encompassing one of the additional al-Kurani texts) it is in a 
second hand. 


125 



Bibliography 


Printed sources 

'Abidin, Muhammad Abu’l-Yusr, compilation. al-Awrad al-da’ima via a 
al-salawdt al-qa i?na, ed. Bashir al-Bari (Damascus, 1991). 

Abu-Manneh, Butrus. ‘Salafiyya and the Rise of the Khalidiyya in Bagh- 
dad in the Early Nineteenth Century’, Die Welt des Islams 43 : 3 (2003), 
pp. 349-372. 

Shaykh Ahmed Ziya’iiddin Gumu§hanevi and the Ziya’i-Khalidi 

Sub-order, in Frederick de Jong, ed., Shia Islam , Sects and Sufism: His- 
torical Dimensions, Religious Practice and Methodological Considerations 
(Utrecht, 1992), pp. 105-117. 

‘Transformations of the Naqshbandiyya, 17 th — 20 th Century: In- 
troduction’, Die Welt des Islams 43 : 3 (2003), pp. 303-308. 

Addas, Claude. Quest for the Red Sulphur: The Life of Ibn 'Arabi (Cam- 
bridge, 1993). 

Ahmad, Aziz. ‘Political and Religious Ideas of Shah Wali-ullah of Delhi’, 
The Muslim World LIT, 1 (1962). 

Aladdin, Bakri. 'Abdalghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1143/1731): oeuvre, vie et doc- 
trine, PhD thesis, University of Paris I, 1985. 

Algar, Hamid. ‘Reflections of Ibn 'Arabi in Early Naqshbandi Tradition’, 
JMIAS X (1991), pp. 45-66. 

Ansari, Muhammad Abdul Haq. Sufism and Shari' ah: A Study of Shaykh 
Ahmad Sirhindi’s Efforts to Reform Sufism (Leicester, 1986). 

Arberry, A. J. The Koran Interpreted (Oxford, 1991). 

Asad, Muhammad, tr. /explanation. The Message of the Qur’an (Bristol, 
2003). 

al-'Asqalanl, Ahmad Ibn Hajar. al-Durar al-kdmina ft a'ydn al-mi’a al- 
thdmina, ed. Muhammad Sayyidjadd al-Haqq (Cairo, 1966). 

Atlagh, Ryad. ‘L’Oraison de personne, donation et noms divins chez 
Ibn 'Arabi (A propos de Da'wat asmd ’ Allah al-husnd attribute a Ibn 
'Arabi)’, Bulletin d’ Etudes Orientales LI (1999), pp. 41-107. 

Baljon, J. M. S. Religion and Thought of Shah Wali Allah, 1702-1762 
(Leiden, 1986). 


127 


Bibliography 

Beneito, Pablo and Stephen Hirtenstein. ‘The Prayer of Blessing [upon 
the Light of Muhammad] by 'Abd al-'AzIz al-Mahdaw!’, JM1AS 
XXXIV (2003), pp. 1-58. 

al-Bitar, 'Abd al-Razzaq. Hilyat al-basharft ta’rikh al-qarn al-thdlith ’ashar 
(Beirut, 1993/1961). 

Brockelmann, Carl. Geschichte der arabischen litteratur (Leiden, 1943- 
49). 

al-Budayrl al-Hallaq, Ahmad. Hawddith Dmiashq al-yawmiya, 1154- 
1175/1741-1762, ed. Ahmad 'Izzat 'Abd al-Karim (Damascus, 1959). 

van Bruinessen, Martin. ‘Kurdish 'Ulama and their Indonesian Disci- 
ples’, at http://www.let.uu.nl/~martin.vanbruinessen/personal/publi- 
cations/Kurdish_ulama_Indonesia.htm. 

‘Origins and Development of the Sufi Orders ( tarekat ) in South- 
east Asia’, Studia Islamika (Jakarta) 1: 1 (1994), pp. 1-23. 

‘Shari 'a Court, Tarekat and Pesantren: Religious Institutions in 

the Sultanate of Banten’, Archipel 50 (1995), pp. 165-200. 

Bulliet, Richard W. The Patricians of Nishapur (Cambridge, MA, 1972). 

al-Burqawi, Zuhayr Khalil. 'Abd al-Gham al-Ndbulusl wa tasawwufuhu 
(Amman, 2003). 

Chamberlain, Michael. Knowledge and Social Practice in Medieval Damascus, 
1190-1350 (Cambridge, 1994). 

Chittick, William C. The Sufi Path ofiKnowledge: Ibn al-Arabi’s Metaphysics 
of Imagination (Albany, NY, 1989). 

Chodkiewicz, Michel. Seal of the Saints: Prophethood and Sainthood in the 
Doctrine of Ibn Arabi, tr. Liadain Sherrard (Cambridge, 1993). 

The Spiritual Writings of Amir Abd al-Kader (Albany, NY, 1995). 

Commins, David. ‘'Abd al-Qadir al-Jaza’iri and Islamic Reform’, The 
Muslim World 78 (1988), pp. 121-131. 

Islamic Reform: Politics and Social Change in Late Ottoman Syria 

(New York and Oxford, 1990). 

Copty, Atallah S. ‘The Naqshbandiyya and its Offshoot the Naqshbandiyya- 
Mujaddidiyya in the Haramayn in the ll th /17 th Century’, Die Welt des 
hlams 43 : 3 (2002), pp. 321-348. 

Cornell, Vincent J., tr. /compilation. The Way of Abu Madyan: The Works 
of Abu Madyan Shuayb (Cambridge, 1996). 

Dallal, Ahmad. ‘The Origins and Objectives of Islamic Revivalist 
Thought, 1750-1850’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 113, 3 
(1993), pp. 341-359. 


128 


Printed Sources 


al-Dardayrl, Ahmad. Salawdt 'aid al-nabJ al-karTm sayyidind rasfil Allah 
IPl-shaykh Ahmad al-Dardayrl al-Khalwati (Damascus, n.d.). 

al-Dhahabl, Shams al-Dln. Dhayl ta’rTkh al-Isldm, ed. Mazin b. Salim al- 
Bawazir (Riyadh, 1998). 

Divane, Selim. Miftah-u miqkildfil-drifin dddb-u tarTkVl-vdsilm, tr. from 
Ottoman, Ahmed Sadik Yivlik (Istanbul, 1998). 

Eickelman, Dale F. Islamic Religious Commentary and Lesson Circles: 
Is there a Copernican Revolution?, in G. W. Most, ed., Commentaries 
{ Kommentar } (Gottingen, 1999), pp. 121-146. 

The Art of Memory: Islamic Education and its Social Reproduc- 
tion, in Juan I. Cole, ed., Comparing Muslim Societies: Knowledge and 
the State in a World Civilization (Ann Arbor, MI, 1992), pp. 97-132. 

Encyclopaedia of Isla?n, eds. C.E. Bosworth et al. (Leiden, 1954-), new 
edn., selected articles. 

Ernst, Carl. The Sha?nbhala Guide to Sufism (Boston/London, 1997). 

Farah, Madelain, tr. Marriage and Sexuality in Islam: A Translation of al- 
GhazalPs Book on the Etiquette of Marriage from the Ihya’ (Salt Lake 
City, UT, 1984). 

Farid, A. H. Prayers of Muhammad (Lahore, 1999). 

Freidmann, Yohanan. Shaykh Ahmad Sirhindi: An Outline of His Thought 
and a Study of His Image in the Eyes of Posterity (Montreal and London, 
1971). 

G inn iighanevi, Ahmed Ziya’uddin. Majmu'at al-ahzdb (Istanbul, n.d.). 

al-Ghazall, Abu Hamid. The Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of God: al- 
Maqsad al-asndfi sharh asm a’ Allah al-husnd, tr. with notes, David B. 
Burrell and Nazih Daher (Cambridge, 1999). 

al-GhazzI, Najm al-Dln. al-Kawdkib al-sd’ ira bi-a'ydn al-mi’a al-'dshira, 
ed. Jibrail S. Jabbur (Harissa, Lebanon, 1959). 

Lutf al-samar wa qatf al-thamar min tardjim a'ydn al-tabaqa al-uld 

min al-qarn al-hddi ' ashar ; ed. Mahmud al- Shaykh (Damascus, 1981). 

Ghunaym, Ahmad b. Muhammad. al-'Arif bi'lldh al-shaykh Ahmad al- 
Hdrun: slratuhu wa kardmdtuhu (Damascus, 1992). 

al-Ghurab, Mahmud Mahmud. al-Tarlq ild Allah: al-shaykh waTmurid 
min kaldm al-Shaykh al-Akbar (Damascus, 1991). 

Gilsenan, Michael. Saint and Sufi in Modern Egypt: An Essay in the Sociology 
of Religion (Oxford, 1973). 

al-Hafiz, Muhammad Muti' and Nizar Abaza. Ta’rtkh 'ulamd’ Dmiashq 
fil-qarn al-rdbi ' ' ashar al-hijri (Damascus, 1986). 


129 


Bibliography 

Hasriya, 'Izzat. al-shaykh Arslan al-DimashqT via flhi lamha 'an al-shaykh 
Ahmad al-Harun (n.p., 1965). 

Homerin, Th. Emil. From Arab Poet to Muslim Saint: Ibn al-Farid, Flis 
Verse and Flis Shrine (Columbia, SC, 1994). 

Hourani, Albert H. Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age, 1798-1939 (Cam- 
bridge, 1989). 

‘Sufism and Modern Islam: Mawlana Khalid and the Naqshbandi 

Order’, in Albert H. Hourani, ed., The Emergence of the Modern Middle 
East (London, 1981), pp. 75-89. 

Ibn 'Arab!, MuhyT al-Dln. Avirdd usbu'iya IPl-shaykh al-'drif MuhyT al- 
DTn Ibn ‘ Arab T (Istanbul and Damascus, n.d). 

al-Dawr al-a' Id li-sidi Sultan al-'Ariftn via 'Vmdat al-Mukdshifin 

via Zubdat al-WdsilTn via Khdtimat al-Aviliyd’ al-Muhaqqiqln, al-Shaykh 
al-Aklmr Mavildnd MuhyT al-DTn ibn al-'Arabi, radiya Alldhu ta'dld 
'anhu via arddhu (Damascus, n.d.). 

al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya (Beirut, n.d.). 

§eyh’iil Ekber Muhyiddm Ibn’iil Arab T (K. S.) Ozel Dua’si “Hizb- 

ud’Devr’ul A’ld”: Orjinali, Turkge okumqu veMdndsi (Istanbul, n.d.). 

The Hizbu-l Wiqdyah of Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi (Oxford, 2003). 

Kitdb al-Jaldl viaTjamdl, tr. R. T. Harris, JM1AS VIII (1989), 

pp. 5-32. 

Kitdb Kashf al-ma'na 'an asma Allah al-husnd, ed. and tr. Pablo 

Beneito (Murcia, Spain, 1997). 

Majmu' salavidt via avirdd sldt MuhyT al-DTn Ibn 'Arab! radiya Al- 
ldhu 'anhu, compiled by Muhammad Ibrahim Muhammad Salim 
(n.p., 2000). 

The Seven Days of the Heart: Prayers for the Days and Nights of the 

Week (Avirdd al-usbu'), tr. Pablo Beneito and Stephen Hirtenstein 
(Oxford, 2000). 

The Tarjumdn al-Ashvidq, ed. Reynold A. Nicholson (London, 

1978). 

Wird (Oxford, 1988). 

Ibn al-'Imad, 'Abd al-Hayy. Shadhardt al-dhahab ft akhbdr man dhahab 
(Cairo, 1351). 

Ibn al-'Iraql, Ahmad b. 'Abd al-Rahlm b. al-Husayn. al-Dhayl 'ala al- 
'ibarfi khabar man 'abar, ed. Salih al-Mahdi 'Abbas (Beirut, 1989). 

Ibn al-Jazarl, Shams al-Dln. al-Hisn al-hasTn min kaldm rabb al-'dlamln 
(n.p., n.d.). 


130 


Printed Sources 


al-Jabartl, 'Abd al-Rahman. 'Ajd’ib al-dthdr fVl-tarajim wa’l-akhbdr 
(Beirut, n.d.). 

al-Jazull, Abu 'Abdallah Muhammad b. Sulayman. Dald’il al-khayrdt 
wa yalihi qasidat al-burda wa qasidat al-munfarija [wa bi-hamishihi 
majmuat al-awrdd waTahzdb wa'l-ad r iy a wa’l-istighdthat] , introduced 
by Salah al-Din Abu’l-Jihad Nakahmayy (Aleppo, 1420). 

Deldil-i-Hayrat: Saldvdt-i-§erifler (Istanbul, n.d.). 

DeldiVul Hayrdt ve §evdrik‘ul Envdr (Istanbul, n.d.). 

Deldilii 1-Hay rat ve §evdrikii , l Envdr fi zikri’s-saldti ale'n-nebiyyi'l- 

muhtdr: Deldilii'l-Hayrat ve Terciimesi (Istanbul, n.d.). 

Johns, Anthony. Islam in Southeast Asia: Problems and Perspectives, in 
C. D. Cowan and O. W. Walters, eds., Southeast Asian History and 
Historiography: Essays Presented to D. G. E. Hall (Ithaca, NY, 1976), 
pp. 314-319. 

de Jong, Frederick. Mustafa Kamal al-Din al-Bakri (1688-1749): Revival 
and Reform of the Khalwatiyya Tradition?, in Nehemia Levtzion 
and John O. Voll, eds., Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Reform 
(Syracuse, NY, 1987), pp. 117-132. 

al-Kattani, 'Abd al-Hayy b. 'Abd al-Kabir. Fihris al-fahdris wa'l-athbdtwa 
mil jam al-ma'djim wa Tmashyakhdt wa’l-musalsaldt, ed. Ihsan 'Abbas 
(Beirut, 1982-86). 

Khan, Hafiz A. Ghaffar. ‘Shah Wali Allah: On the Nature, Origin, Defi- 
nition and Classification of Knowledge’, Journal of Islamic Studies 3: 2 
(1992), pp.203-213. 

Knysh, Alexander. ‘Ibrahim al-Kurani (d. 1101/1690), An Apologist for 
wahdat al-wujud\ JRAS Series 3, 5, 1 (1999), pp. 39-47. 

Islamic Mysticism: A Short History (Leiden, 2000). 

Ibn 'Arabi in the Later Islamic Tradition, in Stephen Hirtenstein 

and Michael Tiernan, eds., Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi: A Commemorative 
Volume (Shaftesbury, Dorset, 1993), pp. 307-327. 

Ibn Arabi in the Later Islamic Tradition: The Making of a Polemical 

Image in Medieval Islam (Albany, NY, 1999). 

‘Ibn 'Arabi in the Yemen: His Admirers and Detractors’, JMIAS 

XI (1992), pp. 38-64. 

Kruk, Remke. ‘Harry Potter in the Gulf: Contemporary Islam and the 
Occult’, British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 32, 1 (2005), pp. 47-73. 

Laoust, Henri. Essai sur les doctrines sociales et politiques de Taki al-Din 
Ahmad b. Taimiya (Cairo, 1939). 


Bibliography 

Levtzion, Nehemiah and John O. Voll, Introduction, in Nehemia Levtz- 
ion and John O. Voll, eds., Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Re- 
form (Syracuse, NY, 1987), pp. 3-20. 

Lifchez, Raymond. The Lodges of Istanbul, in R. Lifchez, ed., The Der- 
vish Lodge: Architecture, Art and Sufism in Ottoman Turkey (Berkeley, 
Los Angeles, and London, 1992) pp. 73-129. 

MajmfT al-awrad al-kabir: yashtamil 'ala al-ma’thur 'an al-a’mnna waT 
aqtdb min al-salawdt ' aid al-nabT waTawrdd waTad' iya wa'Tadhkar 
wa’l-ahzdb wa'l-istighfardt (Damascus, n.d.). 

al-Maqqarl, Ahmad b. Muhammad. Nafh al-tib min ghtisn al-Andalus al- 
ratlb, ed. Ihsan Abbas (Beirut, 1968). 

Martin, B. G. A Short History of the Khalwatiyya Order of Dervishes, 
in Nikki R. Keddie, ed., Scholars, Saints and Sufis: Muslim Religious 
Institutions in the Middle East since 1500 (Berkeley, 1972), pp. 275-305. 

McGregor, Richard J. A. ‘A Sufi Legacy in Tunis: Prayer and The 
Shadhiliyya’, 1JMES 29 (1997), pp. 263-267. 

Sanctity and Sainthood in Medieval Egypt: The Wafa ’’ Sufi Order and 

the Legacy oflbn Arab T (Albany, NY, 2004). 

Mottahedeh, Roy. ‘Review of Richard W. Bulliet, The Patricians of 
Nishapur (Cambridge, MA, 1972)’, Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 95: 3 (1975), pp. 491-495. 

al-Muhibbl, Muhammad b. Fadlallah [Amin]. Khuldsat al-athar ft a'ydn 
al-qarn al-hadT 'ashar (Cairo, 1284). 

al-Muradl, Muhammad Khalil b. 'All. Silk al-durar ft a'ydn al-qarn al- 
thdni 'ashar (Cairo, 1301). 

al-NabulusI, 'Abd al-Ghanl. al-Haqiqa waTmajdz fi rihlat bilad al-Shdm 
to a Misr wa’l-Hijdz, ed. Riyad 'Abd al-Hamid Murad (Damascus, 
1989). 

Nafi, BasheerM. ‘Abu al-Thana’ al-Alusi: An 'Alim, Ottoman Mufti, and 
Exegetist of the Qur’an’, IJMES 34 (2002), pp. 465-494. 

‘He was a Teacher oflbn 'Abd al-Wahhab: Muhammad Hayat al- 

Sindi and the Revival of the Traditionist Methodology’, unpublished 
paper. 

‘Tasawwuf and Reform in Pre-Modern Islamic Culture: In Search 

of Ibrahim al-Kurani’, Die Welt des l slams 42 : 3 (2002), pp. 307-355. 

al-Nass, Muhammad Samir. Mafhum al-bid'a bayna al-dTq waTsa'a (Da- 
mascus, 2002). 

al-Wasila ildfahm haqiqat al-tawassul (Damascus, 2003). 


132 


Printed Sources 


O’Fahey, R. S. Enigmatic Saint: Ahmad b. Idris and the Idrisi Tradition 
(London, 1990). 

and Bernd Radtke, ‘Neo-Sufism Reconsidered’, Der Islam 70: 1 

(1993), pp. 52-87. 

Padwick, Constance E. Muslim Devotions: A Study of Prayer-Manuals in 
Common Use (Oxford, 1996/1961). 

al-Qushashl, Ahmad. al-Simt al-majidfi talqin al-dhikr -waTbay'a wa ilbds 
al-khirqa wa saldsil ahl al-tawhid (Hyderabad, AH 1327/28). 

Rauf, Bulent. Addresses II (Roxburgh, Scotland, 2001). 

The Last Sultans, ed. Meral Arim and Judy Kearns (Cheltenham, 

1995). 

Reichmuth, Stefan. ‘Arabic Literature and Islamic Scholarship in the 
17 th /18 th Century: Topics and Biographies’, Die Welt des Islains 42, 3 

(2002), pp. 281-288. 

Rizvi, Athar Abbas. A History of Sufism in India (New Delhi, 1983). 

Robinson, Francis. ‘Technology and Religious Change: Islam and the 
Impact of Print’, Modern Asian Studies IT. 1 (1993), pp. 229-251. 

El-Rouayheb, Khaled. ‘Opening the Gate of Verification: The Forgot- 
ten Arab-Islamic Florescence of the 17 th Century’, IJMES 38 (2006), 
pp. 263-281. 

al-Shatti, Muhammad Jamil. A'ydn Dimashq jVl-qarn al-thdlith ’asharwa 
nisf al-qarn al-rahi' 'ashar, 1201-1350 (n.p., 1972). 

Schimmel, Annemarie. And Muhammad is His Messenger: The Veneration 
of the Prophet in Islamic Piety (Chapel Hill, NC, 1985). 

von Schlegell, Barbara Rosenow. Sufism in the Ottoman Arab World: Shay- 
kh Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi (d. 1143/1731), PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley, 1997. 

Schmidt, Garbi. Sufi Charisma on the Internet, in David Westerlund, ed., 
Sufism in Europe and North America (London, 2004), pp. 109-126. 

§enocak, Kemaleddin. Kutbu’l Arif in Seyyid Aziz Mahmud Hiidayi (K. S.) 
(Istanbul, 1970). 

Sirriyeh, Elizabeth. Sufi Thought and its Reconstruction, in Suha Taji- 
Farouki and Basheer M. Nafi, eds., Islamic Thought in the Twentieth 
Century (London, 2004), pp. 104-127. 

Sufi Visionary of Ottoman Damascus: Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi, 

1641-1731 (London and New York, 2005). 

Vajda, Georges, ed., Le Dictionnaire des autorites de Abd al-Mu’min al- 
Dimyati (Paris, 1962). 


133 


Bibliography 

Voll, John O. ‘'Abdallah Ibn Salim al-Basri and 18 th Century Hadith 
Scholarship’, Die Welt ties I slams 42 : 3 (2002), pp. 356-372. 

‘Hadith Scholars and Tariqahs: An Ulama Group in the 18 th Cen- 
tury Haramayn and their Impact in the Islamic World’, Journal of 
Asian and African Studies XV 3-4 (1980), pp. 264-272. 

Linking Groups in the Networks of Eighteenth Century Reviv- 
alist Scholars: The Mizjaji Family in Yemen, in Nehemia Levtzion 
and John O. Voll, eds., Eighteenth-Century Islamic Renewal and Refor??i 
(Syracuse, NY, 1987), pp. 69-92. 

‘Muhammad Hayya al-Sindi and Muhammad Ibn 'Abd al- 

Wahhab: An Analysis of an Intellectual Group in Eighteenth- 
century Madina’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and Africati Studies 
38: 1 (1975), pp. 32-39. 

Weismann, Itzchak. Taste of Modernity: Sufism, Salafiyya and Arabism in 
Late Ottoman Damascus (Leiden, 2001). 

Wensinck, A. J. A Handbook of Early Muhammadan Tradition (Leiden, 
1927). 

Winter, Michael. Society and Religion in Early Ottoman Egypt: Studies in the 
Writings of Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha' rani (New Brunswick, NJ, 1982). 

Yahya, Osman. Histoire et classification de Voeuvre d’lbn Arabi (Damascus, 
1964). 

Yapp,M.E. The Making of the Modern Near East, 1792-1923 (London and 
New York, 1987). 

Yilmaz, H. Kamil. AzTz Mahmud HiiddyT: Hayati, Eserleri, Tarikati (Istan- 
bul, 1999). 

Yusuf Ali, A. The Holy Qur’an: Translation and Commentary (n.p., n.d.). 


Internet sources 

http://www.ibnarabisociety.org/Publications.html 

http://www.ihyafoundation.com/index.php?page=scholars#samir 

http://www.islamawareness.net/Jinn/ 

http://www.kitsan.com 

http://www.muttaqun.com/jinn.html 

http://www.as-shifa.org.uk/ulum/shaykhsamir.htm 


134 


INDEX 


'Abidin, Abu’l-Yusr 6, 7, 13n8, 

104nll 

Abraham (Prophet Ibrahim) 53nl6, 
77, 115n99, 116nll2 
Abu Hurayra 110n56, llln68, 
115n98, 115nl05, 116nll0, 

117nll6 

AbuMadyan 52n7, 106n31, 110n59, 

122 

Abu Shama, 'Abd al-Rahman 66nl67 
Abu Tawq, Hashim 12n5 
adab 38, 108n46 

Ahmadl/Ahmadiyya (Badawiyya) 29, 
58n76 

al-'Alawi, Wajih al-Dln 58n81 
Aleppo 22, 24, 26, 39, 42 
al-'Amm, Salim 12n5 
al-anfas (sing, nafas) 72, 105n24 
Ash'ari; Ash'arism 26, 33, 35, 49, 
56n44, 61nll4 

'Ashur, Muhammad Amin lln4 
Aivrdd (al-usbu') 3nl, 3n3, 7-9, 

13n6, 13nll, 16n26, 51nl, 53nl4, 
109n54, llln65, llln66, llln71, 
112n75, 114n92, 115nl02, 116nll2, 
122-124 

al-'Aydarus, Abu Bakr b. 'Abdallah 
51n4 

al-Azhar 35, 39, 40, 63nl32 

Ba'alawi, Muhammad al-Shilli 33 
Bab al-Rahma (Prophet’s Mosque, 
Medina) 123, 125n5 
al-Babili, al-Shams Muhammad 32 
al-BadawI, Ahmad 13n6, 29, 58n76 
Badawiyya see Ahmadl/Ahmadiyya 
Baghdad 23, 34, 64nl50, 68nl86 
al-Bajuri, al-Burhan 43 
al-Bakri, Muhammad Kamal al-Dln 
b. Mustafa 40 


al-Bakri, Mustafa Kamal al-Din 
12n5, 13n7, 36-38, 40, 47, 63nl29, 
67nl73, 119, 120 
Banu 'Asakir 22 
al-Banuri, Adam 59n97 
baraka 8, 12n4, 25, 40, 44, 45, 48, 

49, 52nlO, 66nl67, 66nl69, 72, 
106n26 

al-Barzanji, Muhammad b. 'Abd 
al-Rasul 60nlll 
basjnala 14nl6, 110n64, llln65 
al-Basri, 'Abdallah b. Salim 33, 37, 
59n94, 61nll2 
Beshara 9-10 

al-Biqa'I, Burhan al-Dln 27, 28 
al-Budayri al-Dimyati, Muhammad 
35-38, 47, 120 

Cairo 22, 24, 28-30, 34-36, 38-40, 
46, 47, 67nl79 
Celvetiyye 16n24 
Chishtiyya 34 

Dalu ’ il al-khayrdt 6, 8, 13nl0, 15nl9 
Damascus 5-8, 15n21, 23, 24, 29-31, 
34, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 
53nl4, 61nll4, 63nl43, 64nl50, 
66nl69, 68nl87, 106n25 
al-Damuni, Mahmud b. 'All 41 
al-Damuni, Muhammad 

b. Mahmud 40, 41, 46, 70, 73, 74, 
106n25, 107n33, 108n46, 120 
al-Dardayr, Ahmad (also al-Dardayri) 
12n4, 39, 63nl32 
davir (cycle) 3n4 

‘deliberate interpolation’ hypothesis 
29, 58n70 

al-Dhahabi, Shams al-Dln 25 
dhikr (pi. adhkar ) 29, 30, 57n63 
Dimyat 24, 35 


135 


Index 


al-Dimyatl, 'Imad al-Dln 24 
al-Dimyatl, Sharaf al-Dln 'Abd 
al-Mu’min 23, 24, 66nl66, 

67nl73, 121 

Divine Names 3nl, 7, 12n5, 69, 74, 
76-78 

du a’ see supplication 
Dn'd’ asmd’ Allah al-husnd 124 

Egypt 9, 23, 26, 27, 30, 38-40, 43, 46 
evil eye 105nl6 

Fatma Hanim 9, 16n24 
fihris 1, 26, 27 

fiqh- faqih 24, 26, 28, 29, 32-35, 38, 
43, 48, 55n37, 56n47, 57n63 
Fusils al-hikam 15n21, 46, 52n8, 58n70 
al-Futuhdt al-Makkiya 13n8, 15n21, 
23, 41, 46, 62nl21, 68nl83 

al-Ghazall, Abu Hamid 40, 125n5 
al-GhazzI, Badr al-Dln 28-31, 46, 
66nl66,168, 119, 121 
al-Ghazzi, Jibrll b. Zayn al- 'Abidin 
103n8 

al-Ghazzi, Najm al-Dln 30, 31, 46, 
66nl66, 66nl68, 119, 121 
al-Ghazzi, Radi al-Dln 30 
al-Ghurab, Mahmud Mahmud 6, 7 
Goliath (Jalut) 114n95 
Gumii§hanevi, Ahmed Ziya’iiddin 1,8 

al-Hadl, Muhammad b. 'Abdallah 123 
hadith 6, 22-38, 42-44, 48, 52nll, 
54n20, 55n37, 56n44, 61nll2, 
62nll8, 63nl38, 66nl67, 74, 
104nl3, 110n56 

al-Halabl al-Slrafl, Muhammad 
b. Muqbil 24, 26, 27, 57n49, 121 
Hanafi 39, 41, 42, 60nl02 
Hanbali 26, 36, 56n47, 61nll4 
al-Hanball, 'Abd al-Baql TaqI al-Dln 
b. Mawahib 36, 61nll4 
Haram (Meccan Sanctuary; Sacred 
Precinct of Mecca) 28, 60nl02 
Haramayn (Mecca and Medina) 31, 


32, 43, 58n81, 67nl78, 67nl79 
al-HarawI, Nasir al-Dln Muhammad 
b. 'All, 24, 66nl66, 121 
al-Harun, Ahmad 6-7 
al-Hashiml, Muhammad (al-Jaza’irl 
al-Tilimsanl) 14nl4 
hawqala 107n34, llln65 
al-HifnawI, Muhammad b. Salim 
(also al-Hifnl) 13n7, 36, 38-40, 
47, 67nl73, 120 

Hijaz 22, 23, 27, 28, 32, 34, 39, 43, 

46, 60nlll, 64nl50, 65nl53 
hirmna 73 

hirz (pi. ahrdz ) 3n4, 72, 107n32, 
108n41, 110n64 

Hirz al-aqsdm 73, 107n31, 107n32, 124 
al-Hisarl, 'Abd al-Wahid 
al-Mu'ammar 33 

al-Hisarl, Husayn b. Isma'll 97n42, 
108n41, 124 

al-Hisn al-hasin 106n27, 107n32, 
108n41 

al-Hisnl, Husayn 41 
hizb (pi. ahzab) 3n4, 47, 69, 72, 73 
Hizb of al-NawawI 7, 15nl9, 56n40 
Hizb al-ahadiya 122 
Hizb al-'drifbi’lldh 124 
Hizb al-bahr 44, 51n3, 52n7, 104nl5, 
106n3o' 107n31, 110n60 
Hizb al-nasr 52n7, 106n30 
Hizb al-niir 124 
Hiidayi, Aziz Mahmud 16n24 
al-Husaynl, 'All al-Wasfl 
b. Husayn 51n3 

Ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad 37 
Ibn 'Arabl, 'Imad al-Dln Muhammad 
b. Muhyl al-Dln 54n21 
Ibn 'Arabl, Muhyl al-Dln (Shaykh 
Muhyl al-Dln; the Shaykh 
al-Akbar) 1, 2, 3nl, 5-9, lln4, 
14nl2, 15n21, 17, 22-29, 33-38, 
40-42, 45, 46, 48-50, 51nl, 51n5, 
52nl2, 54nl9-21, 58n70, 61nll4, 
67nl76, 77, 104nl0, 107n31, 
110n61, 110n63, 117nll8, 119-124 


136 


Index 


Ibn 'Arab!, Sa' d al-Dln Muhammad 
b. Muhyl al-Dln 22, 23, 121 
Ibn 'Asakir, Abu Muhammad 

al-Qasim b. Muzaffar 22-24, 119 
Ibn Bakhila, Da’ud 51n3 
Ibn al-Bukharl, al-Fakhr 26 
Ibn Fahd al-Makkl, 'Abd al-'AzIz 
('Izz al-Dln) b. 'Umar 27, 28, 120 
Ibn Fahd al-Makkl, Muhammad 
(TaqI al-Dln) 27 
Ibn Fahd al-Makkl, Siraj al-Dln 
'Umar b. Muhammad (TaqI 
al-Dln) 25-27, 120 
Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalanl, 25-28, 46, 

48, 55n37, 119 
Ibn Idris, Ahmad 43 

Ibn Mashlsh, 'Abd al-Salam 52n7, 
107n31 

Ibn al-Shuwaykh, Badr al-Dln Hasan 
al-MaqdisI 30 
Ibn Taymlya, TaqI al-Dln 

Ahmad 26, 35, 48-50, 68nl86 
IbnTulun 28 

ijaza 5-8, 18, 23, 24, 26-8, 30-33, 

36, 38, 40, 44, 45, 52nll, 54n21, 
61nll4, 65nl66, 69, 74, 119, 120, 
122 

‘child ijaza’ 36, 45, 52nl2, 54nl9, 
65nl66 

'il?n (and ah! al-' Uni) 44, 52nlO 
Indonesia 34 
Iraq 23, 64nl50 

al-Isfahanl, shaykh Abu Shuja' Zahir 
b. Rustam 54nl9 
al-isrn al-jami' 16 
Ismail Pasha 9, 16n23 
Istanbul 8, 16n24, 17 
Istighatha 51nl, 51n6 

al-Jabartl al-Zabldl, Isma'll 23-25, 
46, 67nl76, 121 

al-jaza’irl, 'Abd al-Qadir (Amir) 42, 

49, 64nl52 

al-Jaza’irl, Muhammad al-Sa'dl 39 
al-Jazarl, Muhammad b. Muhammad 
Abu’l-Khayr Shams al-Dln (also 


Ibn al-Jazarl) 67nl76, 106n27 
al-Jazull, Abu 'Abdallah Muhammad 
b. Sulayman 6 
Jerusalem 32, 35-40, 47, 119 
al-Jlll, 'Abd al-Karlm 25, 33 
jinn 70, 72, 104nl3, 104nl4, 105nl7, 
105n22 

Joseph (Prophet Yusuf) 77-78, 
116nll2 

al-Jundl, Muhammad 41, 42, 49, 119 
al-Jundl, Muhammad Amin 
b. Muhammad 42,49, 119 

kalam see theology 
karama (pi. karatnat, act of spiritual 
grace) 7, 12n4, 14nl2, 28, 38, 43 
kasb (acquisition) 33, 61nll4 
al-Kattani, 'Abd al-Hayy b. 'Abd 
al-Kabir 37, 66nl71 
Khalid al-Naqshbandl, shaykh Diya’ 
al-Dln 41, 42, 49 
Khalidiyya see Naqshbandiyya- 
Khalidiyya 

Khalwati/Khalwatiyya 13n7, 37, 38, 
40, 42, 47, 63nl29, 63nl32 
Khatmiyya (Mirghaniyya) 43 
khawass (special properties) 2, 69-74 
Khidr 40 

khirqa 23, 30, 33, 46, 78 
K. Kashf al-tna'na 'an asm a’ Allah 
al-husna 77 

K. al-Mu ashsharat al-maymuna 23 
K. al-Rashahat al-anwariya fi shark 
al-avirad al-akbariya 53nl4, 103n7 
al-Kuranl, Ibrahim b. Hasan 32, 

34, 35, 37, 47, 49, 67nl73, 109n51, 
120-123 

al-Kuranl, Ilyas b. Ibrahim 37, 47 
al-Kuranl, Muhammad b. Ibrahim 
40 

al-Kuranl, Tahir b. Ibrahim 

(Muhammad Abu’l-Tahir) 37,38, 
120 

al-Kurdl, Hasan b. Musa 53nl4 
al-Kurdl, Mahmud (al-Khalwatl) 39, 
40, 120 


137 


Index 


London 9, 17 

Ma'arrat Nu'man 41-42 
niadhhab (pi. madhdhib) 22, 33, 48, 
56n44, 58n73, 122 
al-Maghribl, Ahmad al-Shadhill 
(al-Maqqarl) 38 
magic squares 73 
Mahallat Ruh 29, 30 
al-Mahdall, Yusuf 43 
al-Mahdawl, 'Abd al-'AzIz 107n31, 
110n59 

majlis (pi. majdlis) al-saldt 'aid al-nabT 
5,6 

Majmu' at al-ahzab 1,8 
Malatya 22 
Maliki 32 
Malta 39 

Manzumat asmd’ Allah al-husnd 
al-Dardayrlya 12n4, 63nl32 
Maqam Ibrahim (‘Station of 

Abraham’) 22, 31, 53nl6, 54nl9 
al-MaqdisI al-Salihl al-Hanball, 
al-Salah Muhammad 26 
al-Maraghl, Muhammad Abu’l-Fath 
(al-Maraghl al-saghlr) 26-28, 121 
al-Mar'ashl, Mahmud Efendi 42 
mdrid (pi. marada) (disobedient and 
insolent [jinn]) 70, 104nl3 
Maryam bint Muhammad (Khatun) 
53nl5 

mashyakha 27, 53nl4 

mausoleum of Ibn 'Arab! (also shrine; 

tomb) 5, 15n21, 36, 103n8 
Mecca 22, 26, 27, 31-33, 42-44, 46, 
60nl02 

Medina 26, 30, 32-6, 46, 67nl78, 
68nl85, 119, 121-123 
al-Mlrghanl, 'Abdallah b. Ibrahim 
(al-Mahjub) 42-44, 120 
al-Mlrghanl, Muhammad 
'Uthman 43 

al-Mlrghanl, Muhammad Yasln 
b. 'Abdallah 42, 43, 120 
Mirghaniyya see Khatmiyya 
Morocco 39, 63nl34 


Moses (Prophet Musa) 77, 112n76, 
113n85, 114n89, 114n90, 115nl01, 
116nl08 

al-Mudarris, 'Abd al-Rahman 42 
Muhammad see Prophet Muhammad 
al-Muhibbl, Muhammad b. Fadlallah 
(Amin) 22, 31, 33 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society 
(MIAS) 9, 10 

mil jam shuyiikh (pi. ma'djim shuyiikh) 
23-25,27,28, 53nl4 
muqatta'dt 72, 107n31 
al-Muradl, Muhammad Khalil 
b. 'All 40 
murid 5, 6, 29, 30 
al-Murshidl, al-Jamal Muhammad 
(Abii’l-Mahasin) 25, 56n40, 120 
al-Murtada al-Zabldl (Muhammad 
Murtada) 24, 43, 46 
Mu'tazili; Mu'tazilism 56n44 

al-NabulusI, 'Abd al-Ghanl 12n4-5, 
31, 32, 36-38, 41, 61nll4, 62nll6, 
66nl66, 67nl73, 119, 121, 124 
al-NabulusI, Ibrahim b. Isma'll b. 
'Abd al-Ghanl (grandson of 'Abd 
al-Ghanl) 41, 46, 66nl66, 121 
al-NabulusI, Isma'll (son of 'Abd 
al-Ghanl) 41 

al-NabulusI, Isma'll (father of 'Abd 
al-Ghanl) 32, 36 
al-NabulusI, Isma'll (great- 
grandfather of 'Abd al-Ghanl) 30 
Naqshbandi/Naqshbandiyya 8, 
15nl9, 30, 32-38,47, 61nlll, 
67nl81, 64nl50, 68nl85 
Naqshbandiyya-Khalidiyya 

(also Mujaddidiyya-Khalidiyya) 

1, 64nl50 

Naqshbandiyya-Mujaddidiyya 34, 

41, 68nl85 
al-Nass, Mamduh 7 
al-Nass, Muhammad Samir 7, 14nl4 

Palestine 27, 40, 47 

Prophet Muhammad (Messenger; 


138 


Index 


Envoy of God) 7, 14nl6, 40, 43, 
54nl6, 103n9, 104nl3, 105n20, 
113n79, 113n85, 114n90, 115n96, 

1 16nl 13, 117nll8 
Prophet’s Mosque (Medina) 
(al-Masjid al-Nabawi) 37,123 
Prophet’s Noble Sanctuary (Medina) 
( al-Haram al-Sharif al-Nabawi) 
122 

Qadiri/Qadiriyya 32, 34, 36, 37, 
107n31 

Qarabashiyya (Khalwatiyya) 37-39 
qarin (pi. qurand’) (spirit companion) 

70, 104nl3 

qarin al-su (the Evil One; Satan) 71, 
105nl9 

Qarun 112n74 

al-Qawuqjl, Muhammad b. Khalil 
(Abu’l-Mahasin) 43, 44, 73, 120 
Qunawl, Sadr al-Dln 23 
Qur’an (also Qur’anic worldview) 

31, 35, 45, 48, 49, 56n44, 61nll4, 

71, 74, 77 

Qur’anic quotations (also texts; 
verses) 2, 74-77, 106n26-28, 
108n41 

al-Qushashl, Safi al-Dln Ahmad 
31-35, 46, 49, 61nlll, 67nl76, 

120, 121, 123 

al-Ramll, al-Shams Muhammad 31 
Rauf, Bulent 9, 17 

al-SakhawI, Muhammad b. 'Abd 
al-Rahman 26, 27 
al-salaf al-sdlih, 35, 56n44 
salafi/salafism 26, 29, 35, 48-50, 
56n44, 61nll4 

Salafi/Salafiyya (19 th -century reform 
movement) 49, 68nl86 
salawdt', tasliytr, al-saldt 'aid al-nabT 
(calling down peace and blessings 
upon the Prophet Muhammad) 
lln4, 12n5, 14nl6, 69, 72, 103n9, 
104nl0 


al-Saldt al-Mashishiya 40 
Saldt/Salawdt of Ibn 'Arab! ( Salawdt 
kubrd\ Salawdt and Salat sharifd) 
3n3, 36, 51n6, 119, 120, 123, 124 
Salawdt of al-Dardayr 12n4, 63nl32 
al-Salihiyya 5, 14nl2 
Salimiyya madrasa 36, 41 
samd' (certificate of audition) 24, 27 
sanad (chain of transmission or 
authorities) 2, 18, 41, 44-46, 48, 
49, 52nll, 66nl67, 76, 119-122 
al-SanusI, Muhammad b. 'All 43 
Satan 71, 104nl3, 105nl9, llln70 
Saul (Talut) 114n95 
Shadhili/Shadhiliyya 14nl4, 27, 32, 
43, 65nl62, 106n31 
al-Shadhill, Abu’l-Hasan 73,121, 
123, 124 

Shafi'i 22,23, 25-31,34, 37,38, 
54nl9, 59n85 

al-Shafi'I, Muhammad b. Idris 
(al-Imam) 65nl66, 123, 124 
shahdda 71, 105nl8, 116nlll 
Shahrazur 34, 64nl50 
al-Sha'ranl, 'Abd al-Wahhab 28, 29, 
46, 49, 57n63, 58n76, 121, 124 
al-Sharblnl, 'Abd al-Rahman 31 
shari'a 34, 35, 48, 60nl09, 61nlll 
al-SharqawI, 'Abdallah 39, 40 
Shattariyya 30, 32, 34, 37, 60nl09 
Shaykh Muhyi’l-Din Mosque 5-7, 
15n20 

al-ShinnawI, Abu’l-Mawahib Ahmad 
b. 'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus 29-32, 
67nl76, 121 

al-ShinnawI, 'All b. 'Abd al-Quddus 
29, 67nl76, 121 

al-ShinnawI, Muhammad 29, 58n76 
Sibghatullah b. Ruhullah al-Sindl 
(al-Barwajl; al-Barujl) 30, 32, 58n81 
silsila 23, 35, 46, 67nl76 
al-Sindl, Muhammad Hayat 37, 
59n94 

Singkel, 'Abd al-Ra’uf 33, 34 
Sirhindl, Ahmad 34, 35, 59n97, 
68nl85 


139 


Index 


al-Sulaml, Muhammad b. Husayn 
(Abu 'Abd al-Rahman) 123 
Sunbul, Muhammad Sa'ld 37, 38, 

120 

Sunbul, Muhammad Tahir 
b. Muhammad Sa'ld 38,42, 
64nl53, 120 

Sunna 35, 48, 49, 61nlll 
supplication ( du'a ’) 3n4, 103n8, 
108n44, 108n46, 117nll9 
surat al-An'am 14nl6 
surat al-Fatiha 7, lln4, 12n5, 14nl6 
surat al-Ikhlas 107n34 
surat al-Inshirah 14nl6, 104nl0, 
114n90 

surat al-Waqi'a 71 
surat Ya Sin 12n4, 13n7 
surat Yusuf 77, 113n80 
al-Suyutl, Jalal al-Dln 26, 27, 30, 

43, 46, 57n49, 66nl66, 66nl71, 
67nl76, 121 

Syria 23, 27, 32, 41-43, 46, 49 
al-ta'alluq 77 

al-Tabari al-Makkl, 'Abd al-Qadir 
b. Muhammad b. Yahya 31, 33, 120 
al-Tabari al-Makkl, Ahmad 
b. 'Abdallah 54nl9 
al-Tabari al-Makkl, Radi al-Dln 
Ibrahim b. Muhammad 22, 
66nl66, 120 

al-Tabari al-Makkl, Yahya b. Makram 
b. Muhibb al-Dln 28, 31, 120 
al-Tabari al-Makkl, Zayn al-'Abidln 
b. 'Abd al-Qadir 33, 46, 120 
tabi'a (pi. taivdbi') (female jinn 
companion) 70, 104nl3 
al-Tafilatl, Muhammad 39, 46, 47, 

74, 119 

al-tahaqquq 11 
TahsTn 122 
al-takhalluq 77, 78 


takhrij 55n37 

talisman 73, 106n27, 107n33 
al-Tanukhl, Burhan al-Dln Abu 
Ishaq Ibrahim (al-Burhan 
al-Shaml) 23-25, 119 
tariqa (pi. turuq) 5, lln 1, 14nl2, 18, 
28, 29, 32-36, 47, 61nlll, 67nl77 
Tarjuman al-ashsvaq 103n8 
Tawajjuh svaqt al-sahar 122 
ta'wTdh ; ta'awwudh (taking refuge) 
106n27, llln70 

theology ( kalam ) 33-35, 38, 48, 

61nll4 

al-Tilimsanl, Muhammad b. 'Isa 32 

al-'Ujayml al-Makkl, al-Hasan 
b. 'All, 33, 37 
umm al-sibyan 71, 105n20 
al-Uskudarl, Isma'll b. 'Abdallah 
62nl26 

usill (principles of the faith) 33, 38 
uwaysi sufism; uwaysi sufi 36, 43, 
67nl74 

vrnhdat al-ivujud (Oneness of Being) 
31, 33-36, 48, 49, 56n44, 61nll4, 
67nl81, 68nl86, 122 
Wall Allah, Shah 37, 68nl86 
al-Wanl, Nur al-Dln Abu’l-Hasan 
'All b. 'Umar 23, 66nl66, 121 
wird (pi. awrad) 3n4, 38, 69, 103n2 
Wird al-sahar 12n5, 38 

Yemen 25, 32, 39 
Yivlik, Ahmed 8, 15n21 

Zakarlya al-Ansarl, 26-30, 46, 
66nl66, 67nl72, 173, 119, 121 
al-Zarruq, Ahmad 13n6 
zawba'a (pi. zawabi') (storm demon) 
70, 104nl3 


140 


Whoever recites this prayer will be like the sun 
and the moon among the stars' 

This is the first study of a widely used and much-loved prayer 
by Ibn 'Arab!. The Dawr al-a r ld (‘The Most Elevated Cycle’), 
also known as the Hizb al-wiqdya (‘The Prayer of Protection’), is 
a prayer of remarkable power and beauty. It is said that whoever 
reads it with sincerity of heart and utter conviction, while making 
a specific plea, will have their wish granted. 

This precious book provides a definitive edition of the Arabic 
text, a lucid translation and a transliteration for those unable 
to read Arabic. In addition, there is an illuminating analysis of 
the transmission and use of the prayer across the centuries. Of 
particular interest are the major figures in Islamic scholarship 
and mysticism who have been associated with it, and perceptions 
of its properties. 

Suha Taji-Farouki is Research Associate at the Department 
of Academic Research and Publications, The Institute of Ismaili 
Studies (London), and Lecturer in Modern Islam at the Institute of 
Arab and Islamic Studies, University of Exeter. She has published 
widely on aspects of modern Islam and Islamic thought. 



