Ibn ’Arabi and the Spirituality of Everyday Life 

Presented at the Eleventh Annual Gathering of the Threshold Society 

By Dr. James Morris 


Preface 

by Kabir Helminski: 

Years ago Threshold Books published What the Seeker Needs, translated by 
Shaikh Tosun Bayrak al-Jerrahi. At the time it was not clear to us that 
that text was as much interpretation and commentary as translation. It 
incorporated an Ottoman commentary on the text as if it were part of Ibn 
Arabi’s own words, thereby setting Shaykh A1 Akbar's surprisingly 
universal text into a more parochial perspective. Here and now James 
Morris presents us with a translation of the original text without added 
commentary. We hope that it will be useful for sincere spiritual seekers. 


Ibn 'Arabi on Our Discovery of 'Revelation ' (shar') 

Ibn ’Arabi’s 'Book of the Quintessence' is so condensed that almost each 
line deserves further commentary. However, since he so often refers 
here-with intentional and very pointed ambiguity-to what is given or even 
'said' to the seeker by 'revealed prescription' (shar'), it is very 
important to understand how broadly, but also very individually, he 
understands the actual reality/process to which that central tenn 
corresponds. The following famous passage is a particularly detailed and 
important expression of this understanding which is at the very foundation 
of all his writing: 

Now you must know that if a human being (al-insan) renounces their (own 
personal) aims, takes a loathing to their animal self (nafs) and instead 
prefers their Sustainer/Teacher (rabb), then the Real will give (that 
human being) a fonn of divine guidance in exchange for the fonn of their 
carnal self... so that they walk in gannents of Light. And (this fonn) is 
the Sharia of their prophet and the Message of their messenger. Thus that 
(human being) receives from their Lord what contains their happiness-and 
some people see (this divine guidance) in the fonn of their prophet, while 
some see it in the fonn of their (spiritual) state. 

In the fonner case, he continues, 'that (form) is the inner reality of 
that prophet and his spirit, or the fonn of an angel like him, (who) knows 


1 



his sharia from God.... And we ourselves have often received in this way 
the fonn of many things among the divinely revealed judgments (ahkam 
shar’iya) which we had not learned about from the learned or from books. 
For if the form is not that of (that person's) prophet, then it still 
necessarily refers to their spiritual state or to the stage of the shar’ 
with regard to that moment and that (particular) situation in which (that 
person) saw that vision....’ 

And even in that instance, 'apart from what is forbidden or enjoined (by 
the Sharia), there is no restriction on what (that person) accepts from 
(that vision), whether with regard to beliefs or other things-for God’s 
Presence includes the totality of beliefs (jami’ al-’aqa’id).' 


Subject Outline of lbn 'Arabi's Book of the Quintessence: 
Concerning What Is Indispensable For the Spiritual Seeker 

God’s All-Unity and Transcendence 

Faith in the messengers, companions, 'people of this Path' (Friends of 
God), and serving the poor 

Silence, focus on remembrance of God, and good deeds 
Right companion on the spiritual Path. 

Sincere intention (sidq) in seeking the right guide 
Right livelihood 
Eating little 

Filling the day with prayer 

Sleep, eat, and dress only as really needed 

How to read the Qur’an 

Keeping track of one’s animal self (muhasaba) and shame before God 
Staying Conscious: being aware of demands of the 'Instant' and 
eliminating inner distractions 
Purity (tahard) 

Striving for good moral character traits 
Right attitude toward spiritual 'opponents' 

Right Behavior (adab) toward animals, dependents and children 
Avoiding the powerful and worldly, while practicing ihsan and sabr 
Being present with God at every instant 
Generosity (and avoiding stinginess) [Incomplete] 

Controlling anger and learning how to (not) react to 'negative' 

encounters 

Practicing Ihsan 

Constantly practicing Dhi kr /remem France of God and asking His 
forgiveness 

Repentance and untying the 'knots' of persistence (in opposition to God) 



[Incomplete] 

Taqwa: Awareness of God and its practical consequences 
Avoiding self-deception/Iblis [Incomplete] 

Practicing spiritual conscientiousness (ward) 

Practicing 'non-attachment' to this lower world (zuhd) 


Ibn 'Arabi 


The Book of What is Essential Concerning What Is 
Indispensable For the Spiritual Seeker 

Translated by James Morris 

You asked, O seeker, about the essential core of what the seeker must do, 
so I have answered you in these pages. And it is God Who brings to 
fulfillmcnt-there is no Rabb but Him! 

Know, O seeker-may God bring you and us to the fulfillment of willingly 
obeying Him, and may He cause us and you to know what pleases Him! -that 
(our) closeness to God is only known through His infonning us of that. Now 
He has already done that-all thanks and praise be to God [-through His 
sending the Messengers and sending down the Scriptures and making clear 
the Paths leading to the eternal bliss. So once we have faith and hold 
(this) to be true, there only remains putting into practice (a) those 
actions regarding which one has faith, and (b) through applying the 
revelation (shar') in its appropriate place, with regard to what has 
become established in the souls of those who have faith. 

[2.] Then after that, o seeker, you should have faith in the 

Messengers-may God’s blessings be upon them-and in what they have brought 

(from God) and what they have informed us about Him... 

Next, you should accept and acknowledge the people of this Path, with 
regard to all the stories that are recounted about them (i.e., their 
qualities and accomplishments) and with regard to everything you see from 
them which the (ordinary) mind and (worldly) knowledge cannot encompass. 

In general, you should hold a good opinion of everyone, and your heart 
should be at peace with them. You should pray specially, in secret, for 
the people of faith. And you should serve the poor, recognizing their 
excellence and nobility in that they are content with your helping them, 
and in their bearing patiently with their discomforts and troubles and 
difficulties. 

[3.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is keeping silent (samt), 


3 



except for remembering/mentioning God (dhikr Allah), reciting the Noble 
Qur'an, guiding in the right way someone who's gone astray, exhorting to 
do what is right and forbidding what is wrong, reconciling those who are 
disputing, and encouraging acts of charity-indeed every fonn of good. 

[4.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is searching for someone 
who is right for you, who will help you to (attain) what you are pursuing 
and to (pursue) the way leading there. For the person of faith means a 
great deal to his brother, [alluding to such hadith as "the person of 
faith is the mirror of the person of faith," etc.] And take care to avoid 
the company of the person who is fundamentally opposed (to your quest). 
[5.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is a master and spiritual 
guide (shaykh, murshid). Now (with regard to finding such a guide), inner 
sincerity of intention (sidq) is the very watchword of the spiritual 
seeker, because if the seeker is truly sincere with God, He will turn 
every (outward) "satan" for that person into an angel guiding them 
directly to the good; and He will inspire in that person (the awareness 
of) what is good. For inner sincerity is the ultimate Elixir (the "perfect 
cure"), one that can only be applied to the heart of our essential being. 

[6.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is seeking out this 
(licit) source of support (luqma: literally, sustaining "morsel" of food), 
since the very foundation of this Path is a licit livelihood. The pillar 
of this Path rests on that foundation (of right livelihood): do not burden 
anyone, and do not accept (inappropriately) from anyone, but earn your own 
living. And always be attentively conscientious about what you acquire, 
and about what you say, see, hear and all your other actions. 

[7.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is eating little. For 
hunger brings about an increase in spiritual energy for following God, 
while it takes away spiritual laziness. 

[8.] You should properly cultivate and fill the moments of the night and 
the day: 

[10.] And if you are among those who know how to read, then make it your 
duty to pray (in addition) a full section of the Qur'an from the written 
text. In each chapter, ask and inquire (of God) what you ought to ask 
about, and try to figure out the special relevance (for your immediate 
case: the i'tibar) of each verse. Continually reflect and meditate on each 
verse, (to come to understand) what is its relevance and applicability, 
what those (divine?) Attributes are indicating (to you): reflect on those 
(Attributes) you have and those which you are missing. Then-give Him 
thanks for those which you have and those which you haven’t (yet) 
realized! And when you read about the attributes of the hypocrites and 
those who reject (God), then reflect as to whether or not some of those 
attributes are also in you. 

[11.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is that you should 


4 



observe and take account of your carnal soul (muhasabat al-nafs) and pay 
close attention to your inner thoughts and impulses (khawatir) at every 
moment of time. After doing so, you should feel shame in your heart before 
God. For if you are ashamed before God, then He will prevent your heart 
from experiencing a thought or impulse that is contrary to the revelation 
(shar') or from carrying out any action displeasing to Him/Right 
(al-Haqq). 

Indeed we once had a master who would record his actions (during the day) 
in a notebook, and then when night came he would set them out before him 
and take an account of his carnal soul according to what was noted there. 
And I added to my master's practice by recording my inner thoughts and 
impulses as well. 

[12.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is continually being 
aware of (the correspondence between) one's inner thoughts and impulses 
and the (spiritual demands of) every moment of time.... 

And if you start to do a religiously prescribed act that brings you 
closeness (to God), don’t tell yourself that you will be alive after that 
to do something else. Instead, make that your last action in this world, 
the one in which you will encounter your Lord! For if you do that, you 
will be released (or completed: khalas)-and with that release comes 
(God's) acceptance. 

[13.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is that you should always 
sit down in a state of Purity. So when you become impure, purify 
yourself.... 

[14.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is to seek to realize the 
noble virtues of character (makarim al-akhlaq). 

[15.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is to keep away from 
those who are open enemies [literally "opposites," addad: the stress of 
this term is on the opposition of ends, not on outward relations, beliefs 
or emotional states of mind.] and those who are not of your (spiritual) 
like-but without your holding them to be evil, or even ever having such a 
thought occur to you! Instead, (what is essential is) having your 
intention (niyct) on keeping company with the Truly Real and His people, 
and having your preference be for them. 

[16.] Likewise, you should treat these animals with loving sympathy and 
compassion (rahma) for them, because they are among those whom God has 
caused to be of service (or "subjugated": taskhir) to you. So don't impose 
on them (work) that is beyond their capacity, and do not mount (or "load") 
those of them you mount heedlessly. 

Likewise with regard to whatever slaves your right hand possesses, because 
they are your brothers and God has only let you control them so that He 
can see how you treat them. For you are His slave! So whatever way you 
would like Him to treat you, then do precisely that with your own male and 


5 



female servants. Indeed God will surely requite you (accordingly), so 
whatever evil and ugly deeds you would love to have Him pass over in your 
account, act precisely that same way with regard to them. For all 
(creatures) are God's family, and you are a member of that whole Family. 

If you have a child... oblige them to observe the appropriate behavior of 
the revealed Path (adab al-shari’d) and the character traits of true 
Religion. Induce them to kindness and non-attachment (to this world, zuhd) 
from infancy onward, so that they become habituated to those qualities. 

And don’t encourage desires and cravings in their heart, but rather 

diminish the attractions of the life of this world But don’t do any 

of that out of stinginess with your money or property! 

[17.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is that you shouldn’t 
even come near the gates of the powers-that-be (al-sultan), nor should you 
keep company with those who are competing and striving for (the things of) 
this world, since they will distract your heart from God. But if something 
should force you to keep their company, then behave toward them with fra nk 
good counsel (nasihd), and don't try to fool them (by pretending to agree 
with them). For (in reality) you are (always) doing business with the 
Truly Real, and whatever you do (i.e., as long as it is for God's sake), 
they will be made to be of service to you through (their impact on) your 
wider spiritual situation. Therefore always keep your intention directed 
toward God, (knowing that) He will deliver you from the situation you are 
in through the means that are best for you with regard to your true 
Religion. 

[18.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is to always be present 
with God-may He be exalted! -in all of your actions and all your states of 
rest. [NB: note that this saying is approximately halfway through the 
whole treatise.] 

[19.] Among what is indispensable for the seeker is to always be giving, 
whether you have much or little, whether you are in straightened 
circumstances or at ease 

[20.] You must restrain your anger. For that is a sign of the breadth of 
capacity of your heart. 

Now when you restrain your anger, you please the All-Compassionate 
(al-Rahman).... You have also brought delight to the heart of the person 
from whom you withheld your anger, by not requiting them in kind for their 
(originally offending) action. And that can be a cause of their returning 
to what is right and just and recognizing their own unjust and offensive 
treatment of you; indeed they may even repent for what happened as a 
result of their behavior. 

So you must know the right ways to receive and welcome (offense and 
hostility), and strive to take on that character trait.... So struggle (to 
realize) the qualities (of Mercifulness and Compassion), since they give 


6 



rise to love and affection in people's hearts. Thus the Prophet already 
ordered us to practice mutual affection and to love one another. And this 
(i.e., restraining one's anger) is one of the highest of the causes 
helping to realize Love. 

[21.] You must practice ihsan (doing/creating what is good and beautiful), 
for that is a sign of your shame (or "conscience": haya') before God, and 
of the glorification of God in the heart of the person who is muhsin. For 
Gabriel said [in the famous hadith on the 3 aspects of true ReligionAAv]: 

"What is ihsan? And the Prophet-may God’s blessings and peace be upon 
him!-replied: "It is that you should worship/serve God as though you see 
Him. For even if you don’t see Him, He sees you!".... 

[22.] You must practice dhikr (remembering God) and asking His 
Forgiveness. For (asking His forgiveness) after you've sinned effaces and 
removes it, while doing so after you've been willingly obedient and done 
good (ihsan) brings "light upon light" and joy upon joy. As for dhikr, 
that unifies the (scattered) heart and purifies your inner thoughts and 
intentions... 

[23.] You must strive to loosen the knot of persistence and stubborn 

insistence (on opposing God: israr) in your heart 

[24.] You must remain cautiously conscious of God (taqwa), both with 
regard to your inner life and outwardly.... 

[25.] You must avoid spiritual self-deception (ightirar), which is when 
your carnal soul deludes you concerning God's graciousness and 
forbearance, while you are still persisting in your sinful-disobedience. 

[26.] You must practice spiritual conscientiousness (wara'), which is an 
intuitive avoiding (of something wrong, illicit, etc.) that you feel in 
your heart (sadr). The Prophet-may God bless him and give him peace! -said: 
"Abandon what disturbs you for what does not disturb you." So even if you 
are in need of that (which disturbs you) and you can't find anything to 
replace it, then leave that (need) to God: He will provide you in exchange 
with what is better than that.... For this conscientiousness (wara') is 
the very foundation of true Religion. So as you begin to apply it in 
practice, your actions will become purified, your conditions (inner and 
outer) will become successful, your words will become perfected, blessings 
of divine grace (karamat) will hasten toward you, and you will be 
protected and preserved by a divine protection in everything you do, 
without any doubt. By God, by God, my brother! (Practice) 
conscientiousness, conscientiousness ! 

[27.] And you must practice non-attachment (zuhd) regarding this world, 
reducing your desire for it.... And Praise be to God, the Lord of the 
Worlds! And God's blessings and peace be upon our master Muhammad and His 
Family and Companions! 


7 



PAGE 


PAGE 2 


8 



