ON MAJESTY AND BEAUTY 


The Kitab Al-Jalal Wa-l Jamal of 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi 

translated by 
Rabia Terri Harris 


In the Name of Allah, Most Beneficent, Most Merciful 
The power and strength are His. 

Praise belongs to Allah the Great; His Majesty is part of the manifestation of His Beauty. In 
His proximity He is the Near, in His loftiness, the Observer. Power, splendour, grandeur, and 
magnificence are His whose essence is great beyond any resemblance to other essences. 

His essence is exalted above all motions and stillnesses, all bewilderment and mindfulness. It 
is too high to be overtaken by any explanation, express or implied, just as it is too great to be 
lim ited and described. 

It is beyond any physical descent or ascent, any tangible enthronement upon any throne, 
any haste to seek an object, and - when an object is gained - any satisfaction at reuniting 
with something that had been missed. 

Just so, it is too great to be described in detail or in summary, to be the basis for creeds, to 
alter with the differences among creeds, to find pleasure or pain in action, or to be qualified 
with anything but eternity. 

It is too great: 

- to draw together or be divided. 

- for anything that refers to bodies to refer to it. 

- for understanding to encompass the core of its reality. 

- to be as imagination would describe it. 

- to be as wakefulness or dream would seek to perceive it. 

It is too great for times and places to hold it, for the permanence of its being to be 
measured with the passing of months and years, for above and below, right and left, behind 
and before. 

It is too great for denial or confusion to hinder its majesty. 

It is too great to be comprehended by intellectual reflection, by the spiritual practices of 
masters of illumination, by the Knowers' secrets, by the majestic range of leaders' vision - for 
it is too great to be confined behind veils and curtains, and so cannot be comprehended by 
anything but its own light. 

It is too great: 

- either to exist in the shape of a human being or to lose anything by the existence of 
particular essences. 

- either to accept an alien condition belonging to the entities it has created, or to be 
defined by negative conditions (though it is confirmed by faith). 

- either to be the place of manifestations, or to be known as past, present or future time. 

It is too great for the senses to rest upon, for doubt and confusion to affect, for lik eness and 
analogy to comprehend, for material classification, or for the intimacy of the man of 
knowledge. 

It is too great to be the third of three in company. 

It is great beyond spouse and parents, beyond there being 'a single thing like unto if ( Ikhlas 


Page 1 



4), beyond anything preceding its existence, beyond being attributed limbs, hands, fingers, 
feet, beyond anything else being with it in eternity. 

It is great beyond the laughter and joy promised for the repentance of servants, beyond 
wrath, beyond habitual wonder, beyond alteration of state as it exists among humankind. 

So glory be to Him, Mighty in His magnificence, Grand in His splendour. "There is 
nothing like unto Him, and He is the Hearing, the Seeing." {Shura 1 1) 

To proceed: 

The matter of jalal and jamal, the Divine Majesty and the Divine Beauty, has attracted the 
attention of the witnesses of truth, the Knowers of Allah among the Sufis. Each of them has 
spoken of these two as was appropriate to his own state. Most, however, have connected the 
condition of intimacy with Beauty and the condition of awe with Majesty, and things are not 
as they have said. 

Or rather, to a certain extent things are just as they have said - that is, Majesty and Beauty 
are indeed two attributes of Allah and awe and intimacy two attributes of human beings, and 
when the souls of the Knowers witness Majesty they feel awe and diminution, while when 
they witness Beauty they feel intimacy and elation. Because this is so, the Knowers have 
equated Majesty with Allah's overpowering force and Beauty with His mercy; they came to 
this decision because of what they experienced in themselves. 

I wish, if Allah so w ill s, to clarify the realities of the two to the extent that Allah enables 
me to explain them. 

I say, first, that Allah's Majesty is a relation that proceeds from Him to Him, and He has 
prevented us from true knowledge of it. Beauty, though, is a relation that proceeds from Him 
to us, and it is this which grants us any knowledge we may possess of Him, as well as all 
revelations, contemplations, and spiritual states. Among us, it has two modalities: awe and 
intimacy. That is because this Beauty has an exalted aspect and a related aspect. The exalted 
aspect is called the Majesty of Beauty, and it is this of which the Knowers speak and which 
appears to them, though they believe that they are speaking of the first Majesty we 
mentioned. 

For us, this Majesty of Beauty has been linked to the state of intimacy, and the closer, 
related aspect of Beauty has been linked to the state of awe. 

When the Majesty of Beauty manifests to us, we are drawn intimately close. Were it not 
for this, we would be destroyed, for nothing can continue to exist in the face of Majesty and 
awe together. Thus Majesty in Him is countered by intimacy in us so that we may keep our 
balance in contemplation and maintain a mental awareness of what we see, rather than falling 
into distracted terror. 

When Beauty manifests to us here - and Beauty is the welcoming openness of the Truth 
towards us while Majesty is its unattainable exaltation over us - then His expansiveness in 
His Beauty is countered by our state of awe. For were one expansiveness to be met with 
another it would lead to unacceptable behaviour, and unacceptable behaviour in the Divine 
Presence is the cause of expulsion and alienation. On account of this, one of the witnesses of 
truth who knew its importance said, "Seat yourself upon the prayer-mat {bisdt) and beware of 
presumption (, inbisat )." 

Allah's Majesty acting upon us prevents us from unacceptable behaviour in the Divine 
Presence, as likewise does our awe at His Beauty and expansiveness toward us. 

Therefore, what has been spiritually disclosed to our colleagues is sound. It is their 
judgment - that Majesty in itself closes and diminishes them and that Beauty in itself opens 
and expands them - that is in error. So long as the divine disclosure is sound, the rest is 
inconsequential, but Majesty and Beauty, in their essences, are as we have described them. 

Know that the Qur'an encompasses Beauty and the Majesty of Beauty. As for Absolute 


Page 2 



Majesty, no created being possesses any means of entering into it or bearing witness to it. 

The Truth has singled it out for Him self. It is the presence in which the Truth sees Him self as 
He is. Were we to have a means of entering into this, we would possess a comprehensive 
knowledge of Allah and all that is with Him, and that is impossible. 

And know, brother, that since Allah Most High possesses two realities and has described 
Him self with two Hands 1 and knows us as two "handfuls," the whole of existence has carried 
out this rule: 

There is nothing in existence that does not contain its compensatory opposite. 

Out of all this counterposition, we are here especially concerned with what pertains to the 
Divine Majesty and the Divine Beauty (and I mean by Majesty here the Majesty of Beauty, as 
mentioned above). 

No divine saying related through transmitters from Allah Most High contains anything 
indicative of Majesty without its being accompanied by something of Beauty to counter it. It 
is the same way in all revealed scriptures, and in everything. 

For example, whenever there is a verse in the Qur'an that speaks of mercy, it has a sister 
that speaks of retribution to balance it. Thus His calling Him self "Forgiver of sins, Accepter 
of repentance" is countered by His calling Him self "Terrible in retribution" ( Mu' min 3). His 
saying "Inform My servants that I am All- Forgiving, Most Merciful..." is countered by "...and 
that My punishment is the painful punishment." (Hijr 49-50) His saying, "The Companions 
of the Right, how happy are the Companions of the Right! amid thornless lote- trees..." as the 
verses run ( Waqi'ah 27-28), is countered by "The Companions of the Left, how wretched are 
the Companions of the Left! In hot wind and boiling water..." and so forth ( Waqi'ah 41-42). 
"Faces that day will be radiant" ( Qiydmah 22) is balanced by "Faces that day will be gloomy" 
(i Qiydmah 24), "On the day when (some) faces will turn white" is balanced by "...and (some) 
faces will turn black" ( Al 'Imran 106). "(Some) faces that day will be downcast, labouring, 
toiling" (Ghashiyah 2-3) is balanced by "(Some) faces that day will be happy and well- 
pleased because of their striving" ( Ghashiyah 8-9). "(Many) faces that day will bright, 
laughing, joyous" CAbasa 38-39) is balanced by "(Many) faces that day will have dust upon 
them, darkness will cover them" ('Abasa 40-41). 

If you follow this strand through the Qur'an you will find that all the verses of this type 
follow this pattern. And it is all for the sake of the two divine watchers [the recording angels 
of good and bad deeds 2 ] mentioned in His sayings {Bam Isra’il 20): 

All do We aid, those [who seek this world] 
as well as these [who seek the eternal].... 

and ( Shams 8): 

He reveals to it its way of evil and its way of good 


and his saying about the truthful giver (Lay 1 7): 

We facilitate for him the way to ease 


1 Sad 75: "What prevents thee [Satan] from prostrating to one [Adam] whom I have created with My Two 
Hands?" Ma'idah 64: "...both His hands are spread out, He expends as He pleases The two Hands are often 
held to be mercy and wrath, or Majesty and Beauty. 

2 These watchers are mentioned explicitly in Qaf 17-18: "When the two receivers receive, sitting on the right 
and the left. He utters not a word but there is by him a watcher at hand." 


Page 3 



which He balances with His saying about the lying miser (Lay 1 10): 


We facilitate for him the way to distress 

So know. 

The verses on the Divine Majesty and Beauty are also arranged like this in the Book of 
Allah. I would like to mention a few of them and discuss them by means of ishdrdt, hints or 
indications of what the attentive understanding might grasp in pursuit of these meanings, 
hallowed as they are above human unclarity and animal lusts. May Allah aid us by protecting 
us from sin and error in word and action. By His Might. Amin. 

We will use the word "hints" instead of "section" or "chapter" and begin with a verse of 
Majesty, following it with its corresponding verse of Beauty, and then proceed to another 
verse of Majesty and so on, God willing. It may be that one verse will have two aspects - an 
aspect of Majesty and an aspect of Beauty. If so, God willing we will cite both its sources, in 
Majesty and in Beauty, because it contains the whole counterposition. 

HINTS OF MAJESTY 


Allah Most High said ( Shura 11), 


laysa ka-mithlilihi shay'un 
Nothing is like unto Him... 

This verse contains its compensatory opposite. It is also countered as a whole by His saying 
(Shura 11): 


wa huwa as-samV ul-basir 
and He is the Hearing, the Seeing. 

and by the Tradition of the Prophet (peace be upon him): 

Allah created Adam according to His form. 3 

So know, you who are drowned in the sea of contemplation, that in the reading from Majesty, 
the lik eness referred to in laysa ka-mithlilihi shay'un is literal lik eness. In the reading from 
Beauty, it is figurative lik eness. 

[According to Majesty], this verse denies any equivalence [between Creator and created] 
based on a sharing of essential properties. There are grand oceans here. For instance, [if two 
things are equivalent,] the equivalence is not dictated by the perfection of both of them, or 
their [corresponding] virtues, or anything else: it is only as far as essential properties are 
concerned that they can be each other's equivalents. As far as other attributes are concerned, 
they may either resemble or contradict each other, [indifferently]. 

Thus, two men share in one essential property: though one of them is weak, incapable, 
ignorant, deaf, dumb and blind, while the other is strong, capable, knowledgeable, and able to 
hear, speak, and see, they are united by a single definition: for example, that they are mortal 
rational animals. (Since that is so, it is indicative, so understand.) 


3 Hadith recorded in: Ibn Hanbal, 11:244, 251, 310, 323, 434, 519; Bukhari, Isti'dhan 1; Muslim, Barr 115, 
Jannah 28. 


Page 4 



Thus also, there may be a sharing and equivalence of [primary] attributes that does not 
result in " lik eness." The reality of a thing indeed derives from its essential properties, but 
they are multiple. Another thing may share in some of them without the first thing being " lik e 
unto" the other thing in all respects. For instance, the definition "animal" is applied to human 
beings and brute beasts, but a person is not "the like of," a horse, because one of the 
conditions of l ik eness is the sharing of all essential properties, and that cannot occur except in 
two individuals of the same sort. 

The kin d of lik eness here described is called literal or "intelligible" ('aqliyyah). Let us 
define it as perfect and total equivalence. There is also partial equivalence, which arises when 
there is sharing of some essential properties. Here lik eness exists to the extent of sharing; 
after that point disjunction occurs. 

The realities refuse to accept an equivalence based on secondary, incidental attributes: 
they do not belong to the reality of the essence to which they are attributed, but are lik e 
accidents, even if they are fixed and their nonexistence is inconceivable. In such a case the 
equivalence could only be drawn between two attributes, not between the two entities in 
which the two comparable attributes subsist. For instance, one could propose that two 
"knowers" are equivalent, conceptually or actually, but if they are [genuinely] equivalent it 
will be for some other reason [than "knowing"]. 

Secondary attributes take identity from the individuality of that in which they subsist. 

Their identity is dependent, just as [in philosophy] the place proper to a contingent event 
depends upon the space occupied by its substrate and is to the extent of its substrate, because 
the contingent event is sited [in the substrate]. 

All this indicates that there is no sharing of essential attributes between us and the 
Creator, whether total or partial. On account of this, from the perspective of the realities, 
"l ik eness" between us and Him is denied. Do not deceive yourself that He describes you as 
He describes Himself - as knowing, willing, and so forth. The bmte beasts are described as 
hearing, seeing, and willing as well. So understand that. 

Beauty. The selfsame verse, His saying: 

laysa ka-mithlilihi shay'un 
Nothing is like unto Him. 

is [according to Beauty,] a figurative, "verbal" (lughawiyyah) likening, as when people say 
"Zayd is like a lion." Here the ka has the sense of a preposition [meaning "as," instead of 
being read as part of the compound word ka-mithlilihi. The verse then reads: 

Nothing is like His likeness. 

With this the Truth descends in the station of openness and the attribute of Beauty upon the 
hearts of the Knowers. In this reading Allah denies that He has made them resemble anything 
else in His whole creation - just as, in His Majesty, He denies that the creation resembles 
Him. 

In this reading He gives word of the superiority of the human being over all creatures and 
all else in existence. So the reality of the human being is not bound to one estate. Allah has 
assured h im of the attributes of completeness and perfection, made h im overflow with His 
grace, and given into his possession the keys of the Divine Names. From this figurative 
likening [of the human and the divine] humanity derives its stewardship of the Creation. By it 
the two worlds are supported. By it the spirits are subdued; of it Allah spoke (Jathiyah 13): 

And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens 


Page 5 



and whatsoever is in the earth, altogether, from Him self. 

This reading points to a divine expansiveness. At the moment in which this expansiveness 
manifests in the heart of the witness of truth, his state takes on the sense of the preceding 
reading from Majesty, just as when the Majesty of the verse manifests in his heart, his state 
immediately takes on the sense of the verse's Beauty. This is the way things are in every 
manifestation, as we have shown. 

The reading from Majesty conforms to obligation and denies similitudes and equivalents 
[to Allah]; the reading from Beauty conforms to ecstasy and denies [only] equivalents. So 
Majesty af fir ms the holiness of the Truth, while Beauty af fir ms the exalted rank of the 
servant. 

Again, when He says, concerning the realities of His Majesty, 

Nothing is like unto Him. 

a counterbalance is to be found in the realities of His Divinity. For after this statement its 
opposite arises: the descent of the Truth to the station of likening with: 

[He is] the Hearing, the Seeing. 

So understand this hint. The servant, with his own personal attributes, continues to exist only 
because Allah Himself continues to exist. Even when the servant is invested with attributes of 
perfection as fixed by divine lordship's appearance in human servanthood, and is preserved 
by Allah's active continuance of him, this remains the case. 

Therefore the one who (through Allah's continuing in Himself) is a witness of truth, is 
bedazzled: he is engaged in unbroken contemplation, for he is present with the fundamental 
counterbalance ( taqabul ). And the one who (through Allah's continuation of his personal 
being) is not a witness of truth, is also bedazzled: he is veiled by amazement, for he is with 
Allah, acting upon the universe, by way of His "likening" ( tamdthul ). This is the state of the 
people of Paradise, who, in Paradise, [with the divine prerogative] will say to a thing they 
wish "Be," and it will become. 4 

So the witness of truth sees that the coming into existence of the wished- for thing 
proceeds from the essence of the word uttered and not from the uttering itself. The one who is 
not a witness of truth sees the thing come to be from the uttering itself, because it happens 
through him. Both join in denying that the power comes from themselves - so understand. 

HINTS OF MAJESTY 
Allah Most High said (An'am 103): 

Id tudrikuhu al-absdr 
Vision comprehends Him not. 


This contains its own contrary. 


4 'Abdul-Karim al-Jili cited this report thus: ... it was reported that God sends to the people of the Garden a 
message with the following contents (and God knows best): "A letter from the Life Everlasting to the Life 
Everlasting. I say to a thing ’Be,' and it is, and I have made you to say to a thing ’Be,' and it is" - and they do not 
say to a thing "Be" except that it is. (Ibn 'Arabi, Journey to the Lord of Power, p.80). In the Qur'an (Ha Mini 
Sajdah 31): "...[In Paradise] you shall have whatever you ask for." 


Page 6 



The Prophet (peace be upon him) was asked, "Did you see your Lord?" and replied, "He is 
a light. How should I see Him? The Veil of Power was still lowered; it is never raised. He is 
too great for the eyes to pronounce upon Him." 5 Thus in their contemplation of Him the eyes 
are in the station of bewilderment and inability, and their vision is not their own. As the 
Truthful One [Hadrat Abu Bakr] has said, "The inability to attain perception is itself 
perception." 6 

Hint. The eyes do not perceive the air, because they are immersed in it. Whoever has 
something in his fist does not perceive that thing. 

Hint. The eye wishes to perceive the colour of water, but the contents of the glass are 
overwhelmingly clear. Hie eye does not perceive this colour - for if it did, it would limit it - 
because water resembles vision in clarity. Perception does not perceive itself, for it is within 
itself while it perceives the water. This is vision envisioned. 7 

Hint. When the eye looks at an object with a polished surface and sees a form in it, its 
perception of the form is identical with its perception of the polished body. If it strove to 
discriminate what corresponds to the form in the mirror from the mirror, it would be unable 
to do so. The mirror cannot be grasped. If you inquire of the eye what it saw, it cannot reply 
"I saw the mirror," because the mirror is ungraspable and nothing can pronounce upon it. (If 
someone says this anyway, he is ignorant and has no real understanding in his observation. 

But if he says, "I saw..." and then gives a report of the form or forms that he saw, he has told 
the truth.) 

These things are exempt from the eye's comprehension despite the fact that they are 
created so understand - but the eye may perceive them without grasping them. Their 
assimilation to the forms (reflected within them] is of the essence: the mirror may never be 
disjoined from the reflected form in the vision of any seer. Such is your own vision, so 
co nfir m for yourself what we have said. 

Know that Allah Most High is not to be encompassed by any eye or any intellect. Yet 
stupid speculation measures and defines Him, and weak imagination assigns him form and 
lik eness. Sometimes intelligent people, after having found Him to be free of whatever they 
imagined and speculated about Him, have afterwards fallen back under the power of 
imagination and have pronounced upon Him indirectly. It is as Allah has said (A 'raf 200): 

When a visitation from the Devil a ffli cts them, 
they remember, then lo! they see. 

That is, they return to the sound proof intellect has given them that Allah is beyond all this. 

Beauty. Hie Beauty corresponding to this Majesty is in His saying (Qiydmah 22-23): 

wujuhun yawma'idhin nddiratun ild rabbiha nazirah 
Faces that day will be radiant, looking upon their Lord. 

Allah - glory to Him here opens Him self to us in His Beauty so that we might perceive Him 
with our eyes, looking upon Him. To this also points the tradition of the Prophet (peace be 
upon him): 


5 This report is extremely similar to that in Muslim, Iman 341-2. 

6 Cited in Abu Nasr al-Sarraj, Kitab al-luma', ed. R.A. Nicholson, 1914, p.36 [Arabic text], 

7 This Hint draws on Hadrat Junayd's saying on the relation of the knowledge of Allah to the Knower of Allah - 
"The colour of the water is the colour of the vessel.” (Cited in 'Abdul-Karim Qushayri, Risalah, "Ma'rifah.") 


Page 7 



You will see your Lord, on the Resurrection Day, as you see the 
moon on the night when it is full, or as you see the sun at noon in a 

o 

cloudless sky, and you will not be harmed by your vision of Him. 


And also what Allah Most High has said about the denizens of Hell (Talfif 15): 

That day they will be veiled from their Lord. 

Now in the Arabic language the verb nazara, to look, when accompanied by the preposition 
lid can only mean to look upon, with the eyes. It is when followed by fi that it means to look 
into, mentally and intellectually, and when followed by li that it means to look after, with 
compassion; other prepositions lead it to signify encounter, struggle, or delay. Also, the eyes 
are one of the attributes of the face, while the intellect is not. Consequently the looking 
mentioned in this verse must be the vision of the eyes. 

Allah's saying (A 'raf 143): 


You cannot see Me. 

to Moses (peace be upon him) was a decision relevant to a state that may be known from 
Moses's request [to see his Lord]. We shall not attempt to discuss that here. Yet Allah did 
make [His vision] lawful to the mountain, which shattered to atoms, while Moses fell into a 
swoon. 9 

Now, perception does not faint. A particular constitution is not one of its requirements 
(nor was it a requirement here) - its only requirement is something to subsist in, because it is 
an intangible. Fainting, though, exists by virtue of a heavy and dense constitution. 

When Moses recovered, he glorified Allah. There would be no point to his giving praise 
when he arose from this state unless he had been granted some sort of contemplation. Next, 
realization led him to repentance for the conditions imposed by his constitution. Then he 
avowed that be was (A 'raf 143): 


the first of those who believe 

in what he had seen in that swoon, for faith does not take shape without vision, in whatever 
realm it may be. 10 


s Bukhari, Bad' al-khalq 7, Anbiya' 1; Muslim, Iman 380-383, Jannah 14-17; Tirmidhi Qiyamah 60, Jannah 7; 

Ibn Majah, Zuhd 39; Darimi, Riqaq 12; Ibn Hanbal, 11:230, 232, 254, 257, 316, 359, 473, 502, 504, 507; HI: 16; 

VI:355. 

9 The whole episode is told in A 'ra/143: And when Moses came at Our appointed time and His Lord spoke to 
him, he said: "My Lord, make me see, that 1 may look upon You." He said: "You cannot see Me, but look at the 
mountain: if it stays firmly in its place, then you will see Me." So when His Lord manifested Himself to the 
mountain, it crumbled, and Moses fell down in a swoon. Then when he awakened he said, "Glory to You, I have 
returned to You, and I am the first of those who believe." 

10 In Chapter 367 of the Futuhat (translated by James Morris, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 108:1) 
Hadrat Ibn 'Arabi reports a visionary conversation with Moses about this event. The Shaykh asks Moses (peace 
be upon him): 

"[How is it that] you requested the vision of God, while the Messenger of God said that 'not one of you will 
see his Lord until he dies?"' 

So he said: "And it was just like that: when I asked Him for the vision. He answered me, so that I fell down 
stunned. Then I saw Him in my (state of) being stunned." 


Page 8 



Concerning this, the Prophet (peace be upon him) asked Harithah, "What is the reality of 
your faith?" 

He replied, "It is as if I am looking upon the Throne of my Lord distinctly..." as the 
tradition goes. 1 1 He co nfir med seeing, in whatever realm, and for that reason the reality of 
his faith was sound. The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) allowed that in this case 
Harithah possessed hue realization and something more: validated faith. For there is no point 
to faith in the unseen except its connection to vision. Of this there is no doubt. 

[As the "first of those who believe"], Moses was, in some sense, the first to see Allah with 
his eyes. This degree may refer to either a state of experience or to a station of being. If he 
spoke from his station, Moses was indeed the first person to perceive Allah [continuously]. If 
he spoke from his state, it may be that others had seen Him, but the rank of "firstness" is 
reserved for the state of Moses by the perfection of the episode [rather than by historical 
precedence]. This usage is often found. 

If, in contemplation, the Truth opens you to this verse, be content that: 

Vision comprehends Him not. 

If not, you are ruined, as I have told you. So beware of presumption: indeed, let awe be with 
you constantly, and it will protect you. So know - and Allah, glory to Him, is the Guide. 

HINTS OF MAJESTY 


Allah Most High said ( Jinn 28): 


wa ahsd kulla shay 'in 'aclaclan 
And He counts the number of everything. 

This is a hint of the comprehensive divine knowledge of all of the names of existing things, 
whether they existed in the past, exist at present, or will come to exist in the future. This 
verse applies particularly to actual being that is, was, or will be. It is a connection more 
specific than that given in His saying (Talaq 12): 

ahata bi-kulli shay 'in 'ilman 
He encompasses all things in knowledge. 


I said: "While (you were) dead?" 

He said: "While (I was) dead." 

He said, "...So I did not see God until I had died. It was then that I awakened, so that I knew Whom I saw. 
And it was because of that that I said, I have returned to You, since I did not return to anyone but Him." ... He 
said, "I was seeing Him (all along), and yet I didn't used to know that it was Him! But when my 'dwelling' was 
changed and I saw Him, then I knew Whom I saw. Therefore when I 'awoke' I was no longer veiled, and my 
vision went on accompanying me throughout all eternity." (pp. 64-66) 

1 1 The text of this hadith is as follows: It is related from al-Harith ibn Malik al-Ansari that he passed by the 
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him), who asked him, "How are you, Harithah?" "I am truly a believer,” 
he replied. "I see what you say," the Prophet told him, "but for every saying there is a reality. What is the reality 
of your faith?" 

Harithah said, "I have withdrawn myself from this world. My nights are vigils and my days are fasts, and it 
is as if I am looking upon the Throne of my Lord distinctly. It is as if I am looking upon the people of Paradise 
visiting each other in Paradise. It is as if I am looking upon the people of Hell spiting each other in Hell.” the 
Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said, "O Harithah, you have realized, now persevere!" 

This hadith is traced in Su'ad al-Hakim’s al-Mu'jam al-Sufl (Beirut: 1981, pp. 1264-5). 


Page 9 




- which means all necessary, all possible, and all impossible things. 

(While some theologians will not apply the term "thing" to anything but an actual entity, this 
need not concern us. Allah certainly encompasses all things in knowledge and He certainly 
knows the impossible, and if those who prefer such terminology restrict the "encompassing 
knowledge" of this verse to actually existing entities, they have no proof for it except their 
own usage.) 

Here "all-encompassing knowledge" has a general meaning, while "counting the number" 
demands finiteness in the thing that is counted. "All-encompassing knowledge" is then 
particularly an expression for the connection between knowledge and its infinite objects. 

While it may be that the significance of "to count" in this verse is largely identical with 
that of "to encompass," the meanings are not the same in the case of future events. These are 
infinite [and yet are "counted"] as we have said. For while the things Allah wills are infinite, 
He knows more than He wills, and what He knows is not the same as what He wills. [The 
larger i nfi nity of knowledge] is not "counted" because it cannot be; the count would have to 
include counting itself. And the impossible is not quantified at all, so that "counting" might 
be applied to it. Only knowledge can comprehend it: that is, that it is a property of Allah's 
knowledge of things in all aspects. 

Since the Truth "counts the number of everything," you are among the things that are 
counted, and His protection and observation of you follow. When a contemplation ascends 
from this verse to Him, it wanders lost in the majesty of the Truth, amazed with inspirations, 
glimpses, flashes, fragrances, and significances of the divine, and all that proceeds in it and 
from it. 

So when this contemplation has become real for you, the Truth opens the verse I shall 
mention next, which concerns the Beauty of this Majesty. And then together with what 
intimacy you desire there, He manifests Him self in the Majesty of this verse, which amazes 
and overwhelms the contemplator. So understand. 

Beauty. Allah Most High said (Saffdt 147): 

wa arsalnahu ild mi'ati alfin aw yazidun 
We have sent it to a hundred thousand or more. 

This verse came with the word "or", which pertains to uncertainty, and that is impossible for 
Allah Most High. 

When the Truth descended in His Beauty in this verse, it was in expansiveness toward us. 
Uncertainty is our characteristic, so [the use of "or"] establishes a type of relationship to the 
servant. If the servant is ignorant, he will assimilate his Lord to himself and qualify Him with 
uncertainty, and so fall into error. If he is a co nfir mer of truth, he will flee to the divine 
saying: 


And He counts the number of everything. 

and hold to that secret, and connect this uncertainty to the habitual human way of seeing 
things, according to the customary mode ol expression among the Arabs for the general idea 
of "many." Uncertainty pertains to the creature, despite his wanting to count exact numbers 
and, from another perspective, his wanting to declare h im self as free of lim itation as he has 
declared his Maker. 

So let the reader take this verse as intending the general idea of "many" and not as 
specifying a number. Although numbers are not absent from the verse, still the Speaker's 


Page 10 



intention here is not to signify some particular number; the intention is to signify multitude. 

This sort of phraseology was in use among those to whom Allah sent His Message, and when 
they employed it they certainly did not intend that one should insist on some precise number. 

And when the servant has borne witness to the intention of multitude here, he will 
discover the precise enumeration of all that he has known from the moment he came into 
existence until his present moment, and of what will come to be, without end! 

(Actually, some theological scholars disagree with us about whether knowledge can attach 
to two or more [simultaneous] objects. Some of them hold that this is impossible. Those who 
allow it include Imam Abu Amr al-Silalafi [may Allah be pleased with him], who did not 
disagree with us on this question. As for the statement of al-Isfara'ini [Abu Ishaq] that the 
heart can bear no more than one knowledge at a time, it may be that he was hinting at our 
position. Within the framework of that statement are knowledge, the principles of action that 
take shape from knowledge, and its mastery, as well as an intimation of [what we have said]. 

As far as we are concerned, our discourse is only with the masters of realities and secrets 
among the people of Allah Most High. We have sought to make a connection to some of the 
sayings of formal scholars in order to set at ease hearts that are straying from this Way with 
regard to these realities. So know that. Allah speaks the truth and He it is that shows the 
way.) 


HINTS OF MAJESTY 

Allah Most High said ( Baqarah 163; also Kahf 1 10, Anbiyad 108, Hajj 34, Hd Mini Sajclah 
5): 


ilahukum ildhun wahidun 
Your god is One God. 

This also contains its own counterbalancing opposite. It is a statement applying to everything 
deified and worshipped. 

Hint. This is a secret of Allah's Divinity. If it were not for what every worshipper finds in 
the object of his worship - that is, in his act of worshipping that object - he would not 
worship it. If [idol- worshippers] were to draw strength from the unequivocalness of this 
statement, they would say that when Allah the Misleader misleads, He leads astray the 
relations between Divinity and the one who has no god, while [the idol- worshipper] is merely 
the servant of a particular object of worship, the secret of whose divinity itself belongs to 
Allah Most High. That is the soul of His saying (Baqarah 1 63): 

Your god is One God: there is no god but He. 

So the statement af fir ms the essential form of a thing rejected in actual practice. People only 
adopt these [idols] because of the relationship with the divine that they establish by carving 
them, raising them up, installing them, and submitting their needs to them. So understand 
that: it is a remarkable secret. 

Hint. The partner, which has no being, is denied: therefore nothing is denied. The partner 
is a postulate, not an existent; postulates are ascriptions, and ascriptions have no reality. The 
denial of partners to Allah is the af fir mation of Divine Singularity (al-wahdaniyyah). 
Affirming Singularity finally comes down to existence, while denying partners finally comes 
down to nonexistence. So understand. 

Hint. Allah's Singularity manifests in the Divine enthronement upon the human throne. 

This is in contrast to the Beneficent enthronement: The Divine enthronement is at the centre 


Page 11 



of the circle, according to His saying: 


My earth and My heavens do not contain me, 
but the heart of My believing servant contains Me. 12 

while the Beneficent enthronement encompasses the circle, according to His saying (Ta Ha 
5): 


Hie Beneficent is established upon the Throne. 

The Throne of the Universe in the Beneficent enthronement has the dignity of the Tmth for 
the human enthronement, while the human heart in the Divine enthronement has the dignity 
of the Tmth for the Beneficent enthronement. 

When the Singularity manifests, the contemplator beholds nothing except himself. 

Whether he has developed to the stage of his own singularity or is at some other stage, it is 
the same. If he is at the stage of his own singularity, he is in the position of multiplying unity 
by unity, which can only produce unity. Thus in arithmetic (by way of metaphor and 
approximation), if you multiply one by one, the result will be one. And if the contemplator is 
in a stage other than that of singularity, he is in the position of someone who multiplies one 
by two: he produces nothing but two. This is the case with all numbers similarly treated: If 
you multiply one by fifteen, the result is fifteen; if you multiply one by 155, your result will 
be that by which you multiplied the unity, namely 155. So know that. 

Beauty. As for the Beauty corresponding to this Majesty, the Most High said (Bam Isra'il 

110 ): 


qul id'u Llaha aw id'ur-Rahmana 
ayyamd tad'u fa-lahul-asma' ul-husnd. 

Say: Call upon Allah or call upon the Beneficent: 
whichever you call upon, His are the Most Beautiful Names. 

The Tmth here descends in His Beauty, in expansiveness toward us, with His Beneficence. It 
is in this name, the Beneficent, that He is established upon the Throne of the Universe. This 
is the general divine knowledge to which the Knowers of Allah ultimately attain and in which 
the witnesses of truth are opened and expanded, while the corresponding Majesty closes and 
contracts them - that is: 


Your god is One God. 

Where the name "Allah" gathers together all things whatsoever, the name "The Beneficent" 
gathers together all the realities of the universe and what it contains. From this derives the 
expression rahmdn ad-dunyd wal-akhirah, "Most Beneficent of this world and the Next," and 
because of this people are told: 

Say: Call upon Allah or call upon the Beneficent: 
whichever you call upon, His are the Most Beautiful Names. 

People's supplication is only that which connects them to what benefits them, according to 


12 Hadith cited in Ghazali's Ihya' ’ulum al-din, 15:3 (Hakim 1265-6). 


Page 12 




the extent of their knowledge of God. If a prayer is in the name of the Beneficent, that name 
includes all of the Beautiful Names except "Allah." His are the Most Beautiful Names, The 
Beneficent, and all that the name "Allah" contains. When you call upon Allah, you are only 
calling out of Him the Beneficent in particular, while you are calling out of the Beneficent 
that Name from which you seek the real object of your prayer. Thus the drowning man calls, 
"O Saviour!" the hungry man, "O Provider!" the sinner, "O All- Forgiving! O Most- 
Forgiving!" So it is for all of the Names. So understand what we have pointed out to you: It is 
a great and profitable door. 


HINTS OF MAJESTY 


Allah Most High said (Anbiya' 23): 


Id yus'alu 'an ma yafalu 
He cannot be questioned about what He does... 

This verse is connected to irresistible force, the plane of Allah's transcendent power, and the 
establishment of divine sovereignty over the world. When these attributes become fixed in 
the servant's heart, it is impossible for him to seek the reason for an occurrence or to raise any 
objection to it. 

Hint. Someone who knows what is within himself does not question himself unless a 
questioner is appointed for him who undertakes to ask, and so the question arises. Since that 
is the case, 


He cannot be questioned about what He does 

because [the questioner, the questioned, and the point of the question are] none other than 
Allah, His attributes, and His actions. This significance is answered in the reminder of the 
verse, where He says (Anbiya' 23): 


wa hum yus 'alun 
...but they will be questioned. 

Hie reality here is single and of a piece. Allah is the one who questions them about His action 
upon them and what has manifested through them, and they cannot answer except by His 
action in them. So understand: I have intended to be brief for the sake of people who 
understand hints. 

Beauty. The Beauty corresponding to this verse is His saying ( Nisa'll ): 

lima katabta alaynal-qitdl 
Why did you ordain fighting for us? 

He here descends in His Beauty in expansiveness towards us, so we are enabled to voice a 
question. The Beauty of this verse is our boldness in our absence of knowledge of the 
Majesty at that moment. 

When such a question arises, the servant must join it with His saying: 

He cannot be questioned about what He does. 


Page 13 



Hint. For this construction to follow upon the other presents d if ficulties only for someone 
who must labour and struggle to fu lfil [the questioned order]. By contrast, both [a thing's] 
creation and its nonexistence are the same to someone who accepts a divine order 
spontaneously. If a person has done this, he cannot be called other than wise. 

Hint. Part of wisdom is to put things in their proper places, and one of its aspects is to 
restore forms to what the realm they occupy requires. The realm of this world is not like the 
realm of the Next. It is not necessary that the way things take shape in this world should be 
the way they take shape in the next. Indeed, the Prophet of Allah (peace be upon him) has 
spoken of the joy, graciousness, beauty and harmony of the blessed, and of the opposite 
situation of the damned, while this world is a turbid and mutable confusion, and its mode of 
life sick, meagre, and gloomy. Of necessity, one must leave it, and so of necessity the level of 
things must change. Since [the people who asked the question here discussed] realized this, 
they said what is in the remainder of the verse ( Nisei ' 77): 

law Id akhartand ild ajalin qarib 
Why did You not put it off for us for a little while? 

because a change in the level of things was inevitable [and the order to fight would adopt 
some other aspect in the Next World]. 

Hint. 

Why did you ordain fighting for us? 

To fight means to search for knowledge of Allah by means of reflection and the rejection of 
obscuring imaginations, and to search for contemplative vision through struggle and 
suffering. All of this was part of the expansiveness of the Tmth towards these people. They 
were sentenced to presumption, and so they behaved badly, and not as witnesses of truth. 

HINTS OF MAJESTY 


Allah Most High said (Nisd' 48, 1 16): 

inna Lldhu la yaghfiru 'an yushraka bihi 
Allah does not forgive that partners be ascribed to Him. 

The circle of Id ildha ilia Lldh - "there is no god but Allah" - encompasses all who testify to 
the Unity, and none of them shall remain eternally in Hellfire. The real authority of this 
testimony, however, manifests only in those people who possess no other virtue. Nothing but 
the Most Merciful of the Merciful in particular will intercede for them. The intercession of 
that which is other than Allah is only for people who possess an atom 's weight of good (zuzal 
7) other than the Testimony of Unity. 1 3 


13 The long hadith in Muslim, Iman 352, describes a series of intercessions removing from Hellfire a series of 
groups of people whose hearts possess smaller and smaller quantities of good. The section concludes: 

Then Allah Exalted and Great will say: "The angels have interceded, the apostles have interceded, and the 
believers have interceded, and no one remains (to grant pardon) but the Most Merciful of the Merciful.” 

He will then take a handful of fire and bring out from it people who never did any good and who had been 
turned into charcoal, and will cast them into a river called the river of life, on the outskirts of Paradise. They will 
come out as a seed comes out from the silt carried by flood.... 

The inhabitants of Paradise will recognize them: "These are they who have been set free by the 
Compassionate One, Who has admitted them into Paradise without any deed that they did or any good that they 


Page 14 



Our object, God willing, is to be recorded solely and especially as belonging to Id ilaha 
ilia Lldh and its people. But the majesty of Id ilaha ilia Lldh is difficult to approach, for it 
requires that a person rely upon nothing other than this principle, and that is difficult. 

This greatest of majesties, [the majesty of Unity], opens people tc the play of the mystery of 
divinity as it acts universally in all entities - from the lowest to the highest - that may be 
served or worshipped. But if people stop at this, they expand into presumption in the matter 
of intermediate causes, [holding them to be divine]. They then discover what they have 
created for Him and what He has created foi them. So understand that. 

Beauty. 


inna Lldha yaghfir udh-dhunuba jami'an 
Allah forgives the sins altogether. (Zumar 53) 

but the ascription of partners to Him is one of the sins, and it is not forgiven. 

The Tmth descends in His Beauty in openness toward us and causes us to see the play of the 
mystery of divinity in all objects ol worship. Consequently, people presume to the extent of 
attributing partners to Him. Then the Majesty of His saying: 

Allah does not forgive that partners be ascribed to Him 
chastens them and draws them back. 

When they conceal this within themselves so that they show forth the opposite response, 
Allah conceals the opposition to Him that may arise from them, as a reward for their 
concealing this in their hearts. 

In concealing [their sins] He divides them into two groups. One group He hides from 
others. Another group He hides from themselves, since He hides them from the origin of the 
suffering. If you observe, when they enter Hellfire because Allah makes them die in it, that 
testimony of Unity which they concealed in their hearts itself protectively hides the heart, the 
site of suffering - or if you will, the origin of suffering. 

This is a prodigious hint whose Beauty expands hearts, and whose gentleness and 
graciousness bequeath boldness. 

Hint. When they do not conceal Him, He does not conceal them in any realm, but exposes 
them for all to see. 

Hint. The name "Allah," in the verse we are examining, takes on the sense of al-Ghaffdr, 
the Coverer, the Forgiver, but only because it has come together with the Name al-Jdmi', the 
Gatherer, present in His saying ["Allah forgives the sins.."] "altogether," jami'an. The 

Name al-Ghaffdr does not possess in itself the station of synthesis, jam ', and so "Allah" 
was used. 


sent in advance." 

Then He will say: "Enter My Paradise; whatever you see is yours." 

They will say: "O Lord, You have bestowed upon us what You did not bestow upon anyone else in the 
world...." 

In Iman 377 the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) speaks of his own repeated intercession for the 
faithful, down to those with the tiniest particle of good works. Finally, he says: 

"O my Lord, permit me regarding him who professed 'There is no god but Allah.'" 

The Lord will say, "That does not lie with you, but by My Honour, Glory, Greatness and Might, I will 
certainly take out the one who professed 'There is no god but Allah."' 

The Shaykh includes with these people - saved not for their works, but for the Testimony of Unity alone - 
those who have surrendered to Unity any self to which works could be attributed. 


Page 15 




HINTS OF MAJESTY 


Allah Most High has said ( Zumar 67; also An 'am 91, Hajj 74): 

wa md qadaru Llaha haqqa qaclrahu 
They do not value Allah at His true value. 

Despite all the possible objects of knowledge, divine realization is solely concerned with two 
things. One of these matters is the truth (haqq)\ the other is reality ( haqiqah ). Tmth is known 
with the intellectual powers as a guide, and reality with the powers of direct perception and 
contemplative vision. There is certainly no third capacity after these two. 

Thus when Harithah said, "I am truly (haqqan) a believer," his statement arose from the 
first capacity. His state was supported by the second capacity, but he remained silent about it. 
So the Prophet (peace be upon him) asked him, "What is the reality (haqiqah) of your faith?" 
because he saw that Harithah possessed that second capacity. When Harithah responded with 
high perspective, intimate awareness, and direct perception, the Prophet (peace be upon him) 
told him, "You have realized; now persevere!" To apply the term "realization," ma'rifah, to a 
thing is not entirely appropriate unless it embraces these two realities: haqq and haqiqah. 

Now Allah Most High has informed us that we are incapable of attaining the truth of His 
value (haqqa qadrihi). How then should we reach the reality of His value? "Value" here is 
nothing other than rea li zation of the glorification proper to the station of divinity. If we are 
incapable of that, how much more incapable must we be of the rea li zation of His Essence, 
magnified and exalted as it is to the greatest and highest? 

When the witnesses of tmth behold this Majesty and are convinced that they cannot value 
Him at His value despite all the glorification within them, and have blamed themselves for 
insufficiency, they re ali ze that it is not within the range of temporal creatures to take the 
measure of the eternal. For that would be dependent upon some sort of real relationship, and 
there is no relationship in the deserts of bewilderment of this Majesty. 

Beauty. The Beauty corresponding to this Majesty is His saying ( Dhdriydt 56): 

wa md khalaqtul-jinni wal-insi ilia li-ya'buduni 
I have not created jinn and men except to worship Me. 

With this the souls of the witnesses of tmth are drawn to intimacy, and they aver that Allah 
would not have assigned them to anything that they were not well able to perform, by His 
leave. So when they have co nfir med that through the expansiveness of this station, the 
Majesty of: 

They do not value Allah at His true value 
contracts them and draws them back. 

Hint. If you wish to know the lim its of the realization sought from you in this verse, then 
look at what He has created for you and placed under your authority, and find within yourself 
in what way you want what has been created for your sake to know you. That is exactly the 
way in which the Tmth wants you to know Him, without any addition or subtraction. And if 
you are not able to do this through your lack of grace, take it from what Allah Most High has 
revealed in the Torah: 

O son of Adam, I have created all things for your sake, and you for 
My sake. So do not subjugate that which I have created for Me to that 
which I have created for you! 


Page 16 



Hint. When someone who has been created for your sake causes you difficulties, do not 
blame h im . The blame is yours, because it only seeks out the doer of the action which does 
not please you, and that is none other than Allah, who cannot fitly be blamed: You have 
observed ignorance and bad behaviour in yourself. 

Allah's welcoming openness has ramifications. One of them is that our awe should be 
brought to bear in the presence of Beauty. For if we do not have this at the time of His 
expansiveness, then: 


They do not value Allah... 

at the corresponding Majesty - and if not, we are destroyed. 

Advice. When something created for your sake causes you difficulties, look at what you 
would have wanted from it. Then turn to yourself and examine the relationship between this 
wish of yours and what your Lord has asked of you. You will find that He has sought that 
same thing from you, while you have caused difficulty and refused: Thus this related matter 
has caused you trouble. For when Allah Most High burdens you with any desire concerning 
that which has been created for you - it is all the same whether it be the likes of you or not - 
then certainly He has sought that from you, while you have been unaware. If you have 
obeyed Him in regard to that thing, then it will obey you, and if otherwise, then otherwise. 
Know that Allah has created humankind for the sake of the tme human being. Allah Most 
High said (Zukhruf 32): 

And We have exalted some of them over others by degrees, so that 
some of them may take others in subjection. 

So understand this hint and you will be guided, God willing. 


HINTS OF MAJESTY 

Allah Most High said (Taghdbun 16): 

fattaqu Lldha ma istata 'turn 
So fear Allah as much as you can. 

There is no verse in the Book of Allah Most High, or any word in existence, that does not 
possess three perspectives: Majesty, Beauty, and Perfection. Its Perfection is the knowledge 
of its essence, of the cause of its existence, and of the object of its station. Its Majesty and 
Beauty are the knowledge of how it confronts those who confront it with awe, intimacy, 
contraction, expansion, fear, and hope. Each class has its own proper experience. (In this 
treatise we have turned to mentioning Majesty in one verse and Beauty in a different one only 
in order to acquaint the Sufi student with the forms of correlation between dissimilars.) No 
word possesses a fourth station. In theology, the secret of this appears in the knowledge of 
the Truth Himself and of His two Hands and "handfuls." So know that. 

The witnesses of truth are frightened by the Majesty of this verse. When Allah demands 
that of which they ought to be capable, He casts them into the sea of distance from Him and 
appears in His Grandeur. For it is not within the scope of any obligated being to live up to his 
capacity to fear Allah. Thus the majesty of this inaccessible plain destroys them. But when 
they are nearly destroyed by the intensity of this Majesty, the Truth opens and expands them 
and brings them close to Him, and shows them: 


Page 17 



Fear Allah with His due fear. 


Beauty. Allah Most High said (Al 'Imran 102): 


Attaqu Lldha haqqa tuqatahu 
Fear Allah with His due fear... 

and He descends upon them in His Beauty, in welcoming openness, when He orders them to 
fu lfil the true requirements of religion ( haqq ), so that they draw close and become serene, and 
fear for themselves the dangers of elation. 14 So they apply their lower and higher selves to: 

So fear Allah as much as you can. 

and that verse enables them to preserve the behaviour proper to the Presence. 

Hint. Fear Allah through Allah: This is the Prophet's saying (peace be upon him), "I take 
refuge with You from You." 15 Allah Most High said (Dukhan 59): 

Taste; you, [the sinner in hellfire] indeed, are the mighty, 
the generous! 16 


and He said (Mu'min 37): 


Allah seals every proud, commanding heart. 

Hint. "Fear Allah" - His being displeased - "through Allah" - His being pleased. 

A general universal hint. Fear Allah the Punisher (al-Mu'dqib) by means of Allah the 
Forgiver ( al -Mu ' dfi ) . 

Whoever is acquainted with the realities of the Divine Names has been given the keys of 
the sciences, and this amount suffices. The object of my recalling these verses in detail has 
been to teach the means of entry into this art and the understanding of its approach, for it is a 
powerful method. May Allah protect us and you from pretence. 

Advice. Know, brother, that in the Mighty Qur'an the Tmth addresses us in two ways. In 
some verses He speaks to us to acquaint us with the states of other people and what happened 
to them, with where we have come from, and with where we are going. That is the first way. 
Other verses He addresses to us so that we may address them to Him. These are again of two 
types. Some verses call for us to address Him with actions, as for instance (Hajj 78; also 
Baqarah 43, 83, 1 10; Nisei 11 . Nur 56, Muzammil 20): 

Establish prayer and pay the poor-rate... 


14 The remainder of Al 'Imran 102 runs: "...and do not die unless you are Muslims." 

15 The hadith runs: "O Lord, I take refuge in Your good pleasure from Your wrath and in Your pardons from 
Your punishments. I take refuge in You from You. I cannot count the praises due You. You are as You praise 
Yourself." It is related by Muslim, Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi, Nasa'i, and Ibn Majah. [Hakim 1264] 

16 In these verses divine attributes - 'Aziz, Karim, Mutakabbir, Jabbar- have been arrogated by the servant. 


Page 18 



and (Baqarah 196): 


Accomplish the Pilgrimage and the Visitation... 

and so forth. Others call for us to address Him with words, as for instance 

Guide us in the straight path... ( Fdtihah 6) 

Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us. ..(A/ 'Imran 16) 

Our Lord, do not punish us if we forget or make 
mistakes... {Baqarah 286) 

There are many such verses. The Qur'an does not contain any other sort of address than these. 
It is necessary for you to be mindful of the distinctions in the Word of Allah Most High when 
you read it. For instance, they recite: 


then a pause, then: 
then a pause, then say: 
pause; then say: 
pause; then say: 


When they meet those who beheve 
they say "We beheve" 

and when they are alone with their devils they say 
"We are with you; we were only mocking" 
Allah shah mock. {Baqarah 14-15) 


If you read it in this fashion you will become acquainted with its secrets and distinguish the 
circumstances of the addresses and the stories of states, sayings, and deeds, and the harmony 
of things. So know that. 

We have made our object clear, so let us draw back upon the reins. May Allah benefit us 
and you with knowledge and make us His own. And praise be to Allah, the Lord of the 
Worlds. 


First published in the Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society, Volume VIII, 1989, pp. 5-32. 

© Rabia Terri Harris, 1989. You may download and print this document for your own personal use, but you 
may not copy it or republish it without written permission from the Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society. 






