Mystical Treatises of muhyiddin l bn 'Arabi 


IBN 'ARABI 



The Universal Tree 
and the Four Birds 


Translated by Angela j affray 




The Universal Tree 
and the Four Birds 


MYSTICAL TREATISES OF 
MUHYIDDIN IBN 'ARABI 


FORTHCOMING TITLES 

The Four Cornerstones of the Way 

( Hilyat al-abdal ) 

Annihilated in Contemplation 

( Kit ah al-fana ’ ji I-mushahadd) 

Technical Terms of Sufism 

(al-Istilahat al-sufiya) 


Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi 


The Universal Tree 
and the Four Birds 

Treatise on Unification ( al-lttihad al-kawni ) 




Introduction, Translation and Commentary 

ANGELA JAFFRAY 


ANQA PUBLISHING • OXFORD 

IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE 
MUHYIDDIN IBN 'ARABI SOCIETY 


Published by Anqa Publishing 


PO Box 1178 
Oxford 0X2 8YS, UK 
www.ibn-arabi.com 


In association with the 
Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society 
www.ibnarabisociety.org 


© Angela Jaffray, 2006 

Angela Jaffray has asserted her moral right 
under the Copyright, Designs and Patents 
Act, 1988, to be identified as the author 
of this work. 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without 
the prior permission in writing of the publisher. 


Cover design: Michael Tiernan 

Manuscript on the back cover: Shehit Ali 2813, f.33, dated ah 621, 
copied by Ayyub b. Badr al-Muqri and checked by the author. 
Courtesy of the Suleymaniye library, Istanbul. 


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data. 

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 

ISBN-10: 0 9534513 9 9 
ISBN-13: 978 0 9534513 9 5 


Printed in the USA 


I am in love with no other than myself, 
and my very separation is my union ... 


I am my beloved and my lover; 
I am my knight and my maiden. 

Muhyiddln Ibn 'Arab! 



CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements viii 

Of the Tree and its Four Birds, by Rafi Zabor 1 

Biography of Ibn 'Arabl 9 

Introduction 16 

Overview 16 

Stylistic Considerations 18 

Treatise on Unification 21 

Dedication 26 

Discourse of the Universal Tree 35 

Discourse of the Ringdove 38 

Discourse of the Royal Eagle 42 

Discourse of the Strange Anqa’ 46 

Discourse of the Jet-Black Crow 47 

Commentary 53 

The Title 53 

The Proemial Poems 61 

The Dedicatee 63 

The Fourth Poem 77 

Meetings in the Barzakh 78 

Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Four Birds 80 

Cosmic Marriage and the Genealogy of the Birds 103 

Appendix: The Edition of the Text 111 

Bibliography 115 

Index of Qur’anic Citations 123 

Index of Names and Terms 125 

Arabic text 


vii 


Acknowledgements 


I owe special thanks to my friend Rafi Zabor, who suggested several 
years ago that I translate the Ittihdd al-kawm for the Web journal 
Words without Borders, and supplied the illuminating introductory 
essay. 

Thanks, also, to Words without Borders who published an early 
version of the translation in their August 2004 issue. 

I couldn’t ask for more responsive and meticulous editors than 
Stephen Ilirtenstein and Michael Tiernan at Anqa Publishing. 
Stephen’s learned comments enriched my commentary immensely, 
and Michael’s design and careful editing are each, in their own 
domain, things of beauty. 

Without the sublime French translation, sagacious notes, and ex- 
pert edition of the Ittihdd by Denis Gril, I would have found myself 
frequently at a loss. Lovers of Ibn 'Arabl owe a tremendous debt to 
him and other pioneers in the enterprise of Ibn 'Arabl translation for 
their deep knowledge of the Shaykh’s words and works. 

Jim Robinson, eagle-eyed companion in devoir, has accompanied 
this translation from fledgling stage to final flight. lie has given 
me many helpful suggestions, kept me from colossal mistakes, and 
offered unflagging encouragement all the way. 

Ld tawfiq ilia bi-lldh 


viii 


Of the Tree and 
its Four Birds 

RAFI ZABOR 


It is He who is revealed in every face, sought in every 
sign, gazed upon by every eye, worshipped in every 
object of worship, and pursued in the unseen and 
the visible. Not a single one of His creatures can fail 
to find Him in its primordial and original nature. 

Muhyiddin Ibn Arab i 


Ibn 'Arab! - or Abu 'Abd Allah Muhammad ibn al-'Arabi at-Ta’I 
al-Hatiml, also called Muhyiddin, the Revivifier of the Faith - was 
born in 1165 ce in the city of Murcia in Muslim Andalusia, and died 
seventy- five years later in Damascus: a narrative traversal of the 
Islamic world more than mirrored by his encompassment of its in- 
ternal, esoteric aspect. Called within the Sufi tradition the Shaykh 
al-Akbar, or Greatest Master, and seen as its ultimate exemplar of 
esoteric Knowledge, he was, among many other things, the author 
of approximately three hundred books, some of them no longer than 
a pamphlet, others comprising several volumes. The best known and 
doubtless most important of these are the Fusils al-hikam, in many 
ways the crystallization of a lifetime’s gnosis, and the enormous 
Futuhdt al-Makkiyya , which combines the functions of a spiritual 
encyclopedia and intimate autobiography. The work translated here 
( Risdlat al-ittihad al-kawm . , likely written before the author’s arrival 
in Mecca circa 1203 ce), combining verse, prose, and rhymed prose, 
is certainly one of Ibn 'Arabl’s most beautiful and, while quite unlike 


i 


Rafi Zabor 

any other of his books so far translated into English , 1 it is wholly 
characteristic of his genius. 

In it the reader will encounter a work of extraordinary literary 
and spiritual artistry, followed by a commentary whose lucidity and 
acuity of articulation will introduce the neophyte - its thorough- 
ness should also please the specialist - to some of the details of the 
cosmological order to which our author’s imagery, in this work and 
elsewhere, belongs; but there ought also to be room for a few general 
words of introduction for the general reader who might happen by. 

In the history of monotheistic spirituality, in particular its Western, 
Abrahamic branch incorporating Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, 
you may find an aspected resemblance here and there, but there is 
really no one, from taproot to topmost leaftip, like Muhyiddln Ibn 
'Arab!. In Islamic esotericism per se, especially with regard to its 
metaphysical and exegetical component, virtually everyone before him 
is an anticipation and everyone after a commentator or interpreter. 

In encountering him you come upon the ultimate implications of 
monotheism whole and unaltered. Since in exoteric Islam the Unity 
and Absoluteness of God is the primary axiom, it follows that for its 
definitive esotericist a One and Absolute God implies the non-exist- 
ence of anything other than Himself - since that would qualify His 
Singleness and Absoluteness - so that there is not, in existence or the 
many shades of relative existence and non-existence in the eighteen 
thousand Universes anything other than Him tout court. From this 
vantage point we pass to a world of apparently infinite paradox, ac- 
tually a series of antinomic affirmations logically exclusive of each 
other but united in the suprarational fact that is the One Existence: 
the Universes are His appearance, He is the same as the existence of 
the things, although nothing can be associated with Him and Ele is 
transcendent from all qualification, even that of transcendence; eve- 
rything that exists is the self-manifestation of possibilities latent in 
His essence, existentiated by His Mercy, yet the possibilities them- 
selves choose their modes of being and demand existentiation from 

1 . It has been translated into splendidly lyrical French by Denis Gril as Le Livre de 
I’arbre es des quatre oiseaux, Paris: Les Deux Oceans, 1984. 


2 


Of the Tree and its Four Birds 


Him, so that their will is free and their own, and the consequences of 
their actions rebound upon themselves, although there is essentially 
no will but His, and He is transcendent from the existent things 
without difference although He is their being and substance, and He 
guides them, perpetually, because He is their inextricable essence. 
The conscious, perfected human being - the normal run of humans 
are veiled from the Reality by the illusion of their own self- existence 
- is the complete reflection of its infinite and eternal Source, and it 
is precisely for the sake of this mirroring that the Absolute breathed 
His mercy upon the possibilities and potentials latent in Himself 
and permitted the Universes to become, although their existence is 
pure contingency, a veil, an illusion, and also the Truth in Truth, 
while there is only He, and nothing with or beside Him, ever. And 
so on, almost ad infinitum, according to each particular face of rev- 
elation implicit in the nature of the Reality. Ibn 'Arabl’s cosmology 
sometimes seems as detailed as the Universe whose ontology it ad- 
dresses; at other times he demolishes all secondary consideration in 
a totalizing affirmation of the indivisible and unconditionable One: 
these two components of his vision do not exclude each other but 
are essentially the same, and cannot be halved. And as the Shaykh 
sometimes likes to put it: if you understand it that way, fine; and if 
not, then not. 

What after Ibn 'Arabl’s death came to be called the doctrine of 
the Unity of Being was not, however, some ultimate ingenuity of ex- 
egesis but the result of profound self-experience, and when you read 
one of his books you encounter in some measure the extraordinary 
individual who experienced it. His is a flavor one comes to recognize 
and distinguish from all others, a genius both inclusive of and be- 
yond rational compass, a forthrightness challenging all complacen- 
cies, and at times a robustly humorous overturner of all cognitive 
convention. His complications dazzle and bewilder the intellect and 
imagination; alternately his bluntness can, at times, make even so 
bold a visionary as William Blake seem almost an equivocator by 
comparison. 

* * * 


3 


Rafi Zabor 


He is also a poet of extraordinary expressive power, as a reader of 
the Ittihad will quickly discover. The book begins with a preludinal 
poem which even in translation seems one of the great one-time- 
only coups of the world-long poetic tradition: 

From my incompleteness to my completeness , and from my 
inclination to my equilibrium 

From my grandeur to my beauty , and from my splendour to my 
majesty 

From my scattering to my gathering, and from my exclusion to my 
reunion 

From my baseness to my preciousness , and from my stones to my 
pearls . . . 

For thirteen lines Ibn 'Arabl’s contemplation swings like a pen- 
dulum between the polarities of a self whose sphere of allusion and 
reference is the entire subsolar and sublunary world with its risings 
and settings, breezes, boughs, and shade, its steeds and gazelles - an 
extraordinary ambit of discourse that shudders to a halt with the 
abrupt discovery of that self’s isolation and the limits of its enclo- 
sured love. The last line of the section reveals the reality behind even 
so inspired and inevitable a self- absorption and uncovers the crux of 
its anguish - Do not blame me for my passion . I am inconsolable over the 
one who has fled me - but if we have left the sphere of the passional self 
and the romance of its poetics, it is not in obeisance to the dictates 
of a conventional mysteriosophy; neither will Ibn 'Arabl, as his ac- 
customed readers know, end his quest with a conventionally diffuse 
devotional yearning for the Infinite as traditionally conceived: when 
the Shaykh al-Akbar seeks something he almost invariably finds it, 
on a large scale and in plenty. 

When, after this reflective pause, the tolling of the polarities 
resumes, a measure of discrimination inserts itself into the cascade 
of couplets - Continuous is the light of knowledge ; ephemeral the light of 
intuition - even, shortly, a teleology, and a changing a sense of quest: 

So that I might bring to light what lies hidden in night's core . . . 


4 


Of the Tree and its Four Birds 


To explain the mysteries' roots and express the realities' enigmas. 

The author ends this phase of his invocation by affirming the 
Spiritual nature of his inspiration and by distinguishing it from that 
of the willfully ignorant. 

Ibn 'Arabl then calls his book to order, announces its title, and 
dedicates it to Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr b. Sinan, a “master of the tri- 
ads and dyads” in whose nature, manner, or teaching must surely lie 
the root of the introduction’s uniquely “dyadic words of praise”. Ibn 
'Arabl then praises God, with reference to a particularly important 
Qur’anic passage - “Surely We created man with the most beautiful 
of constitutions”, that is, in the essential image of God, “then We 
reduced him to the lowest of the low” (Q. 95: 4-5), which in part is to 
say the mortality and limits of this world but especially the blinkered 
consciousness we typically have in it - before resuming a rapturous 
poetics one might have thought eliminated by so firm a theologi- 
cal intrusion. In the following strophes, self and Self, essence and 
Essence, humanity and the properly Divine are both distinguished 
from each other - with particular reference to some occulted aspects 
of the individuated subjectivity - and revealed as inextricable. 

In the last moment of this introductory section the author de- 
lineates still more precisely the book’s locus of revelation: situated 
“on the equator”, that is to say at the meeting-point, of “the most 
beautiful of constitutions” and the “lowest of degrees” that encom- 
pass between them the essential human state - the comprehensive 
conjunction of the Transcendent and the Manifest, in other texts 
the place where “the two seas meet”, and where the Arc of Neces- 
sarily-so-ness and the Arc of Possibilities converge - metaphorically 
rendered here as the City of human habitation and the Sinai that is 
the archetypal site of human receptivity to the continuous Divine 
self-revelation. 

Having articulated the book’s metaphysical context, Ibn 'Arabl 
plunges us into the heart of a drama drawn on a consciously cosmic 
scale - there is tremendous urgency behind the narrative from the 
first - evincing an impetuosity and directness, a singleness of feeling 


5 


Rafi Zabor 


whose impassioned expressiveness is quite distinct from the Persian 
genius for decoration and ameliorative address to a normative audi- 
ence, most familiar in the West in the work of Ibn 'Arabl’s great 
near-contemporary Jalaluddln Ruml. In fact Ruml, recognized with- 
in the Sufi tradition as its ultimate exemplar of divine and spiritual 
Love, is not Ibn 'Arabl’s opposite but his complement. Ibn 'Arabl is 
alleged to have seen the child Ruml and to have remarked upon his 
future greatness, but the two are more substantially and convinc- 
ingly linked through Ibn 'Arabl’s adopted son and great disciple Sadr 
al-Dln Qunawl, who later was a friend and collaborator of Ruml’s in 
Konya, the capital of thirteenth-century Seljuk Turkey; and it may 
be that Ibn 'Arabl and Jalaluddln Ruml are ideally understood in 
terms of each other, one expressing explicitly what is implicit in his 
counterpart. 

Lilli k e the Turkish-Persian master, who usually took care to veil 
his jalal, or fierce majestic aspect, Ibn 'Arab! not only rushes straight 
at the Truth but trusts It to let the chips fall where they may: sub- 
jective after-effects and secondary concatenations are not his re- 
sponsibility. Our author exemplifies not only the Arabic genius but 
the compressive power of the Arabic language, which like its cousin 
Hebrew and perhaps metaphorically the cosmos those languages 
characteristically describe, parlays a finite number of consonantal 
roots into an improbably multiform eloquence of expression. 

Ibn 'Arabl shouts, “Alas, my burning heart. I fled from the uni- 
verse and here I am in it. Where is what I seek? ”, and is answered by 
a voice remarkably like the one that addressed Job from the whirl- 
wind - the author scruples to note that it comes from neither inside 
nor outside him - demanding where he was at the setting up of the 
Throne and the placement of the celestial couches, not to mention 
before the establishment of the supreme horizon, and so on for a 
staggering paragraph delineating the utter incommensurability of 
the human and the Divine. 

The Voice from the Whirlwind quite silenced Job’s inquiries, but 
the ever-impetuous Ibn 'Arabl, registering that voice and its impli- 
cations completely within himself, goes onward and inward through 


6 


Of the Tree and its Four Birds 


aspect after aspect in his quest for the entire unedited human re- 
ality’s reflection of the Divine Itselfness. I ll rough an audacity of 
question and answer, in a sort of active submission to the Reality’s 
fullness of will, in a dialogue of extreme spiritual subtlety dense with 
Qur’anic allusion and references to the Shaykh’s own extensive ter- 
minology - much of which will be lost upon the neophyte reader 
but which registers as strong gnostic drama regardless ; 2 also see the 
Commentary - Ibn 'Arabl finally arrives at the book’s central image 
of revelation: a Tree with four birds in its branches. Our author will 
converse with each of them. 

Up to this point the protagonist’s struggle has been to detach 
himself from the last traces of contingent creation and so address 
himself appropriately to the unqualified Reality. (Along the way, the 
reader will have noted Ibn 'Arabl’s characteristic combination of the 
evocative and the categorical: “If you extract me from the crash- 
ing waves and deliver me from the horror of this gloomy night I 
will never more pronounce the adverb or the preposition of place.” 
Later on, the Crow will tell him: “I am the lamp and the winds. I am 
the chain against the rock and the wing. I am the sea whose waves 
constantly strike one another. I am, of the countable, the singular 
and the paired.”) Beginning with his converse with the Tree, our 
author has reached his goal, and everything that follows is fruition 
and harvest. 

At the very end of the text, Ibn 'Arabl tells us what the Tree and 
the birds represent, so it is probably best for the reader first to submit 
to their unassisted poetic authority. Still, for a reader unacquainted 
with the tradition and its symbology a few words of explication will 
probably not go amiss. Much of Ibn 'Arabl’s personal terminology is 
a more abstract rendering of the language of the Qur’an, hence the 
Pen appears as the First Intellect, the Tablet as Soul, and so forth. Of 
the birds in the Tree, the third, or “strange Anqd”\ could certainly 
use a small interpretative assist and a bit of speciation. Sometimes 
translated as Phoenix, the strange Anqd’ in any case is proverbially 

2 . The indispensable glossary of his terminology and precis of his metaphysics is 
The Twenty-Nine Pages. Roberton, Roxburghshire: Beshara Publications, 1998. 


7 


Rafi Zabor 


a bird that has a Name but no manifest Being - Ismi var . ; varlik yok, 
as almost any Turk can tell you - and hence is associated with the 
Reality of Realities, a mercurial entity which is the foundation of the 
world. The Reality of Realities is, as Ibn 'Arab! writes in The Book of 
the Description of the Encompassing Circles-. 

the All-embracing Universal which includes the temporal and 
the eternal, increasing by the multiplicity of existents without 
however subdividing by their fractioning ... It is neither existent 
nor non-existent; it is not the world, and yet it also is; it is other 
without being other, given that otherness implies [at least] two 
existents, whereas sameness implies matching . . . resulting in a 
third notion qualified as form . 3 

It is co-eternal with the eternal and co-temporal with the tempo- 
ral. The Reality of Realities is the core of Ibn 'Arabl’s logos doctrine, 
and ultimately it is perfectly manifested in the heart of the Perfected 
Pluman Being. (Further ambiguities of its indeterminacy are treated 
within the translator’s Commentary.) 

Amid all the beauty and allusiveness of Ibn 'Arabl’s dialogue with 
the Tree and its birds, I would especially point out the peroration of 
the Crow, which is in part a reproach to spiritual types who disdain 
the created world of bodies and limitation and night. The Shaykh 
says elsewhere that there are People of the Right Hand, who care 
only for spiritual things, and People of the Left Hand, who care 
only for the things of this world; then there are the people who make 
no distinction between the spiritual and the mundane, and they are 
Those Who Flave Been Brought Near - yet another piece of a rich, 
meticulously and majestically developed perspective that this short, 
lyrical and evocative book, youthful but already magisterial, with a 
conceptual spine strong as tensile steel, makes palpably real to the 
reader through the eloquence of its imagery and the uniqueness of 
its author’s unforgettable voice. 

3. Translated by P. Fenton and M. Gloton, in Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi: A Commemora- 
tive Volume , ed. S. Hirtenstein and M. Tiernan. Shaftesbury, Dorset: Element, 1993, 
pp. 25-6. 


8 


Biography of Ibn 'Arab!' 


Muhyiddln Muhammad Ibn 'Arab!, known as “al-Shaykh al-Akbar”, 
or Greatest Shaykh, was born in 1165 in Murcia, Spain. Ilis father 
held an important post in the government, first of Ibn Mardanish 
and later of his rival Abu Ya'qub Yusuf, the Almohad ruler. When he 
was seven, his family moved to Seville where, despite an initial at- 
traction to youthful diversions, an even stronger inclination toward 
the devotional life began to emerge. Even as a very young man he 
began to undertake retreats, spent considerable time in cemeteries 
communing with spirits, and realized astounding mystical insights. 

Ibn 'Arabl tells us little about his first formative retreat, other 
than to say that, unlike most other mystical wayfarers, he was seized 
by a kind of divine attraction or ecstasy ( jadhba ), instead of proceed- 
ing slowly and laboriously by disciplined stages. 1 2 This illuminative 
event, if the later report of al-Qari’ al-Baghdadl (d.1418) is to be 
believed, 3 had its inception in the midst of a typical Andalusian fete 
attended by the teenaged Ibn 'Arabl. About to raise a cup of wine to 
his lips, the young man heard a voice proclaim: “O Muhammad, it 
was not for this that you were created!” 4 Ele left the party abruptly 
and fled to a cemetery, where he engaged in solitary invocation of 
God. 


1. I have relied on two excellent biographies of Ibn 'Arabl: Quest for the Red 
Sulphur, by Claude Addas, and The Unlimited Mercifier, by Stephen Hirtenstein. 

2. Ibn 'Arabl’s initial spiritual opening is described in Chittick, Sufi Path of Know- 
ledge (hereafter SPK), p. 383, n. 12: “at twenty he began his ‘wayfaring’ ( suluk ) in the 
technical Sufi sense, while in his early teens he had undergone his first opening as the 
result of a divine attraction {jadhba ), through the intervention of the prophets Jesus, 
Moses, and Muhammad.” 

3. See Hirtenstein, Unlimited Mercifier, p.254, n. 3. 

4. Ibid., p. 52. 


9 


Biography oflbn 'Arabi 


It was there in the cemetery that Ibn 'Arabi experienced a triple 
vision of the Prophets Jesus, Moses, and Muhammad. 5 Each of these 
three masters illuminated certain aspects of the Path: from Jesus he 
learned the necessity of asceticism; from Moses, he learned that he 
would attain ' ilm ladunt . , the kind of knowledge bestowed by God as 
a gift rather than the result of striving followed by acquisition. 6 Fi- 
nally, in the midst of a vision in which he was threatened by assailants, 
the young man saw the Prophet Muhammad, standing on a hill. The 
Prophet urged him to “hold fast to me and you will be safe.” 7 From 
that point on, Ibn 'Arabi became an ardent student of hadith, those 
traditions that recount the Prophet’s words and actions, taking them 
as a model for his own behaviour. 

This extraordinary retreat, however, was followed by a period 
of “abandonment” (fatra ), which is not at all uncommon in either 
prophets or friends of God ( aivliya ’). 8 The Prophet Muhammad 
himself experienced it. It is a period of silence from the divine side. 
The mystic finds himself, as it were, in a desert, completely with- 
out sustenance, tormented by doubts and unsure of how, or even 
whether, to proceed. It is a state in which one may wander compass- 
less forever; or one can emerge safely, as Ibn 'Arab! did, hearing the 
divine voice recite to him the Qur’anic verses: 

And He it is who sendeth the winds as tidings heralding His mercy, 
till, when they bear a cloud heavy [with rain], We lead it to a dead 
land, and then cause water to descend thereon and thereby bring 
forth fruits of every kind. Thus we bring forth the dead. Haply 
you will remember. As for the good land, its vegetation cometh 
forth by permission of its Ford. (Q. 7: 57-58) 


5. See Fut. IV. 172. For the significance of this unprecedented triple vision, see 
Hirtenstein, Unlimited Mercifier, pp. 52-6. 

6. See Fut. I. 254. Although common to the prophets, this form of knowledge is 
rarely found in anyone else, a noted exception being al-Khidr, Moses’ mysterious 
companion, whose remarkable tale is found in Surat al-Kahf (Q. 18:65-82). 

7. Hirtenstein, Unlimited Mercifier, p. 55. 

8. Ibid., pp. 58-60. 


10 


Biography oflbn Arabi 


Hearkening to the advice of Jesus, his “first master,” 9 whom the 
Shaykh was to meet numerous times in visions, the young man 
pledged himself to an ascetic life and gave away all his possessions 
to his father. From then on, as he recounts in the Futiihat, he lived 
on gifts and alms, trusting in God for his needs. 10 Flenceforth, the 
young Ibn 'Arab! became a bona fide man of the Sufi Way. lie stud- 
ied the traditional Islamic sciences with some of the foremost schol- 
ars of Andalusia, and concurrently realized, in a very short time, the 
panoply of mystical stations he describes in his various writings. 

By around the age of twenty, Ibn 'Arabi had acquired his first Sufi 
teacher, Abu al- 'Abbas al-'Uryabl, 11 an illiterate peasant whom he 
met in Seville. Among this shaykh’s many virtues was that he had 
realized the station of perfect servitude, the highest of all stations. 
Al-'Uryabl was not the only shaykh that the young Muhyiddln fre- 
quented during the thirty years he spent in Andalusia prior to his 
departure to the east. In his two compendia devoted to Andalusian 
saints, he lists and describes some seventy-one Sufi shaykhs, four 
of them women, from whom he received important spiritual direc- 
tion. 12 

Ibn 'Arabl’s own spiritual state was made clear to him in three 
successive visions between 1190 and 1202. In them, he saw all of the 
messengers and prophets as well as “all the believers - those who 
have been and those who will be - until the Day of Resurrection.” 13 
Fie learned that the major reason why the prophets and messengers 
had assembled in the spiritual world was to congratulate him at being 
designated the Seal of the Muhammadan Sainthood - the heir to the 
Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad. As he explains in his Futiihat, 
the Seal of the Muhammadan Sainthood combines all the qualities 

9. Fut. III. 341. 

10. Fut. II. 548. 

11. Some accounts give his name as al-'Uryanl. 

12. Many of the Sufi masters with whom Ibn 'Arabi studied are described in 
his Ruh al-quds and al-Durra al-fdkhira, partially translated by Austin as Sufis of 
Andalusia. 

13. Fut. III. 323; trans. Addas, Quest, p.74. 


II 


Biography oflfoi Arabi 


of all the saints; and since prophets are also saints, it includes all 
the qualities of all the prophets, excluding those pertaining to their 
legislative roles. 

In 1193, Ibn 'Arabi made his first journey beyond the Iberian 
Peninsula, to North Africa. He stayed in Tunis for a year, study- 
ing with Shaykh al-MahdawI, a disciple of the famous Algerian saint 
Abu Madyan, whose tomb is a site of pilgrimage to this day. When 
Ibn 'Arabi returned to al-Andalus, he began to compose the first of 
his more than 300 works. His primary activity, however, seems to 
have been spiritual wayfaring in order to learn from Sufi masters 
and study Prophetic Traditions. Between the years 1195 and 1200, 
he was engaged in constant travel between Spain and North Africa, 
while concurrently traversing another landscape, not visible to the 
physical eye. To many of these purely spiritual locales he gave evoca- 
tive names, such as “God’s Vast Earth” where “the spiritual takes 
body and the body becomes spiritual,” 14 and the “Abode of Light”, 
where all destinies are known from beginning to end. 

But the greatest vision he experienced at this time was no doubt 
the spiritual ascent ( mi' raj ) he made in imitation of the Prophet’s 
corporeal ascent to the seven heavens and to the Divine Presence 
Itself. Mounted on the “Buraq” 15 of his spiritual aspiration, he trav- 
elled through the seven celestial spheres, each one presided over by 
a prophet. Beyond the seventh heaven lies the goal of every mi'raj-. 
the “Lote Tree of the Limit”, alluded to in the Qur’an. It was here 
that he became, as he puts it, “nothing but light”. 16 He realized that, 
despite the multiplicity of God’s names, attributes, and acts, there 
is but a single Being to which they refer, and that “the journey that 
[he] made was inside [him] self, and it was toward [him] self he had 
been guided.” 17 

14. Corbin, Creative Imagination , p. 4. 

15. The fabulous steed on which the prophets are said to be transported on their 
celestial ascent. Ibn 'Arabi often uses this image metaphorically. See Fut. III. 345, R. 
al-ittihad, p. 30. 

16. Fut. III. 350; trans. Addas, Quest, p. 156. 

17. Fut. III. 350; trans. Addas, Quest, p. 156. 


12 


Biography oflbn Arabi 


The year 1200 marks the beginning of Ibn 'Arabl’s journey to 
the east. He was never again to return to Spain. From North Af- 
rica he went first to Cairo, then to Hebron - where he visited the 
tomb of Abraham - then Jerusalem, where he prayed at the al-Aqsa 
Mosque. His final goal was Mecca, where he intended to perform 
the pilgrimage. Among his many visions and meetings with remark- 
able men and women, two merit special mention. The first was his 
astonishing encounter with the strange personage he calls the Fata, 
or youth, evocatively described in the first chapter of the Futuhat. 
One evening, when he was performing the ritual circumambulations 
of the Ka'ba, a mysterious youth accosted him. Was he an angel or a 
human being? The embodiment of the Black Stone, or the personi- 
fication of the Floly Spirit? Ibn 'Arabl’s celestial twin or an epitome 
of the Futuhat itself? Perhaps he was all of these and more. After de- 
scribing their conversation, recounted in poetry and rhymed prose, 
a pact between the young man and the Shaykh was concluded. The 
result of this epiphany is the some 2000 tightly-packed folio pages of 
the Futuhat, a masterpiece of mystical literature. 

It was also in Mecca that he made the acquaintance of the young 
woman Nizam, who would become the inspiration for his love 
poems, written approximately fifteen years later (1215) and collected 
in the Tarjuman al-ashwaq (The Interpreter of Desires). Nizam was 
a young Iranian lady of considerable beauty, piety, and intelligence 
- “the ornament of our gatherings”, 18 as Ibn 'Arabi says in his Preface 
to the Tarjuman. Commentators have seen in Nizam the archetypal 
Eternal Feminine, the embodiment of Sophia, the equivalent of 
Dante’s Beatrice, and the coincidentia oppositorum. 19 She is not only 
the muse of the Interpreter of Desires but also may have inspired the 
paean to Woman found in the final chapter of the Fusils, on the Wis- 
dom of Singularity in the Word of Muhammad. 20 “Contemplation 


18. Tarjuman, p. 11. (Unless otherwise noted, all references are to the Nicholson 
edition.) 

19. See Austin, “The Lady Nizam”, pp. 35-48. 

20. Ibid., p. 39. 


13 


Biography oflbn Arabi 


of the Reality without formal support is not possible”, he says. “The 
best and most perfect kind [of contemplation] is the contemplation 
of God in women.” 21 

Ibn 'Arabi was to spend roughly two years in Mecca. It was at 
Mecca, during a brief period of dissatisfaction with the aptitude of 
his students that, in a dream vision, the Shaykh was given the divine 
advice to “counsel God’s servants”. 22 Whether addressing jurists or 
Sufis, rulers or simple folk, for the remainder of his life the Shaykh 
made it a point to convey his message, orally and in his many writ- 
ings, to all the believers he encountered and at the level of their 
varied understandings. Some of the texts he wrote were short, com- 
posed at a single sitting; some ran to hundreds, even thousands, of 
pages, as in the case of the Futuhat , and were the products of years 
of labour and revision. 

Just as his early years were devoted to constant wayfaring through- 
out Andalusia and the Maghreb, Ibn 'Arabi spent the years span- 
ning 1204 to 1220 travelling back and forth across Syria, Palestine, 
Anatolia, Egypt, Iraq, and the Elijaz. During this time he acquired 
many disciples, continued his literary output, and even became 
an advisor to the Seljuk sultan Kayka’us. It was not until the final 
twenty years of his life that he ceased his peregrinations and in 1221 
settled permanently in Damascus. 

At the end of 1229, an event occurred that resulted in the writing 
of the Shaykh’s best known book, the Fusus al-hikam, or “Bezels of 
Wisdom.” In a dream, he saw the Prophet Muhammad, holding a 
book. The Prophet told him: “This is the book of the Fusus al-hikam. 
Take and give it to humanity so that they may find benefit from it.” 23 
The twenty-seven chapters contained therein - each one devoted to a 
different prophet and elucidating a particular facet of wisdom - were, 
according to Ibn 'Arabi, inspired by the Prophet with no personal 
input on his part whatsoever. The Fusus has remained to this day his 
most provocative and most frequently commented-upon work. 

21. Fusus, p. 217; trans. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p.275. 

22. See Addas, Quest, p.218. 

23. Fusils, p.47; trans. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p.45. 


14 


Biography oflbn Arabi 

Ibn 'Arabi died in Damascus in November 1240. Over the 
centuries, his teachings spread east as far as China, disseminated by 
devoted students - many of them gifted mystics and poets in their 
own rights. For the past century, the West has also played a part 
in this process, as scholars and translators continue the effort 
to bring the Shaykh’s remarkable writings to the attention of the 
contemporary world. 


15 


introduction 


Overview 

The Ittihad al-kavmi is one of Ibn 'Arabl’s early works, most likely 
written before the author’s journey to the eastern Islamic lands 
in 1201/02 CE (ah 598). 1 Written primarily in rhymed prose and 
poetry, it shares the charm of its cousins among the visionary mysti- 
cal-philosophical fables of the Islamic world, such as those penned 
by Avicenna, Suhrawardl, and 'Attar. 2 

It also belongs to the genre of mystical ascent literature. Although 
ascent literature is represented in many of the world’s traditions, 3 
in Islam the model derives from the Prophet Muhammad’s ascen- 
sion through the seven heavens to the Divine Presence as allusively 
recounted in Suras 17: 1 and 53:4-18. In later years, Sufis undertook 
to imitate the Prophet’s ascent and, beginning with Abu Yazld al- 
Bistaml (d.874 ce), several described their visions, either orally or in 
treatise form. Abu Yazld’s strange account of his mi' raj, for example, 
was recounted by (pseudo-?) al-Junayd (d.910) 4 and interpreted by 
al-Sarraj (d.988). 5 Plaving flown in the form of a bird to the Tree 
of Unity, the Lote Tree of the Limit, described in Sura 53: 14, Abu 


1. See Gril, Le Livre de I’arbre, p. 29; Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, p. 165. Although 
the precise dating of the treatise is not known, in all likelihood it was preceded by 
such works as Mashahid al-asrdr al-qudsiyya, al-Tadbirat al-ildhiyya, Mawaqi ' al-nujum, 
Inshd’ al-dawa’ ir, and other treatises that were probably lost when Ibn 'Arab! left al- 
Andalus. Its subject matter bears a close resemblance to that of another early work, 
' Uqlat al-mustawfiz. 

2. See Corbin, Avicenna-, Thackston, Mystical and Visionary Treatises-, and Attar, 
Mantiq al-tayr. 

3. Among the many studies devoted to this subject in world literature, see 
Couliano, Out of this World, and Culianu, Psychanodia I. 

4. See Sells, Early Islamic Mysticism, pp. 242-50. 

5. See al-Sarraj, K. al-luma'. 


16 


Overview 


Yazld remarked that it was “all a cheat ” 6 - a remark interpreted by 
Sarraj as meaning that Abu Yazld found anything but attention to 
God a useless vanity. 

Besides the Ittihdd al-kawm, Ibn 'Arab! wrote at least two inde- 
pendent works , 7 K. al-isra’ and R. al-anwar, devoted to the subject, 
and included two extensive mi' raj accounts in his Futiihdt . 8 9 In addi- 
tion, treatises such as K. al-isfdrj a spiritual itinerary, cover much of 
the same ground as the mi' raj accounts. It is evident that the Shaykh 
found the ascent genre a fitting one to describe both the boons and 
the perils of the spiritual path. 

Despite its shimmering surface, the Ittihdd is not an easy work 
to fathom because of its dense symbolism and enigmatic style. The 
initial series of poems immediately plunges the reader into a verit- 
able sea of perplexity, as the author “swings like a pendulum between 
the polarities of [the] self .” 10 The poems are then followed by a dedi- 
cation whose dedicatee appears to be a long-dead Arabian prophet, 
while all the while the author claims to be addressing none other 
than himself. At last the narrative begins, but where? It appears that 
the reader has been set down at the centre of the world, the sym- 
bolic locus of balanced oppositions. Here the tension aroused by 
the constant fluctuation from state to state, amply elaborated in the 
opening verses, turns to lament as the author engages in an obscure 
dialogue with the Supreme Being of his very self. From this place 


6. Sells, Early Islamic Mysticism, p. 2 19. 

7. See Chodkiewicz, Seal of the Saints, Chap. 10, which translates most of R. al- 
anwar and provides an illuminating commentary on it. R. al-anwar has also been 
translated by Harris as Journey to the Lord of Power, and more recently in the study by 
Radtke, Neue kritische Gdnge. 

8. See Put. II, Chap. 167 (French translation by Ruspoli, LAlchimie du botiheur 
parfiiit ); and Fut. Ill, Chap. 367. See also Morris’ partial translation and commentary 
of this latter in Chodkiewicz, Meccan Revelations, as well as his excellent study, “The 
Spiritual Ascension”. 

9. See Gril, Le Devoilement des effets. See also Jaffray, Unveiling the Effects, forth- 
coming. 

10. See Zabor’s Foreword (“Of the Tree and Its Four Birds”), p.4. 


17 


Introduction 


of momentary equilibrium, the author ascends on a Night Journey 11 
to the outer limits of creation. There, in a garden at the farthest 
boundary of the cosmos, he hears the discourse of a Tree and four 
Birds, whose charming tales and flowery speech mask the fact that 
they are none other than the awesome images of the Perfect Pluman 
Being and his four cosmic faculties: the First Intellect, the Universal 
Soul, Prime Matter, and Universal Body. Never before have these 
abstruse philosophical concepts been described in such an elliptical 
and suggestive way. 


Stylistic Considerations 

The Ittihdd al-kawnJ is written in a combination of rhymed prose 
(saj') u and poetry. As a youth Ibn Arabl seems to have been par- 
ticularly taken with belles-lettres and his early works, despite their 
complex metaphysics, are remarkably lyrical. lie never lost his love 
of either rhymed prose or poetry, as we see in many of his works. Ilis 
DiToan contains more than 800 verses and his Tarjumdn al-ashviaq, 
a collection of sixty-one mystical love poems, is considered one of 
the finest collections of Arabic verse. His 560-chapter magnum 
opus, the Futuhdt al-Makkiyya, begins with a lengthy proemium, 
embellished with flowing saj ' and punctuated by many lines of verse. 
Nearly every chapter of this lengthy summa begins with poetry and 
many of the chapters contain additional lines of original verse. 

Ibn 'Arabl’s sheer love of the Arabic language can be felt on every 
page of his work, both poetry and prose. Among the various schools 
of thought concerning the origin of language, Ibn 'Arabl would have 
to be put in the category of those who favoured the divine institution 


11. The Night Journey, or Ism , alluded to in Sura 17:1 of the Qur’an, was 
Muhammad’s celestial ride on the fantastic steed Buraq to the Sacred Precinct of 
Jerusalem. From there he ascended through the seven heavens to the Divine Pres- 
ence. This ascent, known as his mi'raj, is recounted in Sura 53:4-18. 

12. One of the meanings of the word “ saj is the sound a pigeon (or dove) makes 
- quite fitting for a treatise in which a ringdove plays a major role! 


18 


Stylistic Considerations 


of language. Thus for him, to take a word back to its root meaning 
and then to extend it to its full semantic range is a process that reflects 
the nature of the primal divine speech as one/many: “God takes one 
of these words and makes it many, for He says, Our only word to a 
thing, when We desire it, is to say to it ‘B e\’(kun) (Q. 16:40). ” 13 On 
the one hand, as a Qu’ranic hermeneut, he insists on a sometimes 
shocking literalism that peels away incrusted layers of traditional 
interpretation. On the other hand, he allows for a word in the hands 
of a spiritually realized interpreter to bear any meaning as long as it 
lies within the range of understandable Arabic. God, he says, is fully 
aware of all the possible meanings of any given word, thus the gnos- 
tic interpreter is encouraged to open himself up to the full spectrum 
of interpretations, as long as there is evidence for them, based on the 
actual Qur’anic text. 14 

Drawing from nearly all the disciplines of his time - the tradi- 
tional Islamic sciences, mysticism, theology, philosophy, and even 
alchemy and magic, Ibn 'Arabl’s working vocabulary is astoundingly 
rich. Anchoring himself on the (primarily) tri- consonantal Arabic 
root, he leaves his imagination free to explore a complex world of 
interpenetrating meanings and associations attainable by acceptable 
morphological permutations. 15 Although this approach generally 
produces a scintillating multifaceted gem whose surfaces delight and 
whose deep hues attract, the reader is often at a loss when trying 
to fathom the seemingly endless potential meanings, both lexico- 
graphical and symbolic, of any given word or phrase. The end result 


13. Fut. III. 283; trans. Chittick, Self-Disclosure of God (hereafter SDG), p. 196. 

14. See Fut. II. 119, Chap. 73, Question 128. Note, however, that for Ibn 'Arab!, 
interpretation is more often than not a dangerous enterprise in the hands of most 
people, so he frequently condemns the ignorant use of ta’wTl, esoteric interpretation, 
that strays far from the literal meaning of the text. 

15. Not all critics have found the Shaykh’s ventures into etymology as fruitful as 
they might seem. Jaroslav Stetkevych takes hint to task for relying too heavily on the 
etymological method for commenting on his own poems of the Tarjumdn-. “Words 
run the danger of appearing like denuded, uprooted stems, leaving the imagination at 
best in amazement” ( Zephyrs ofNajd, p. 94). 


19 


Introduction 


is a thoroughly over-determined text that loses much in the effort of 
its commentator to explain it. 

Unlike the Tarjumdn al-ashveaq, on which the author himself - for 
better or worse - wrote a mystical commentary, the Ittihdd al-kawm 
provides no such aid, and there are seemingly no commentaries by 
the Shaykh’s followers to guide us. 16 Other writings by Ibn 'Arabl, 
especially his Futiihdt al-Makkiyya, are essential to ferreting out clues, 
but, as is the case of all his works in general, the Qur’an - and to a 
somewhat lesser extent, the Prophetic Traditions (hadith) - remains 
the touchstone. 

Thus, in its brief compass, the The Universal Tree and the Four 
Birds manages both to engage the reader’s imagination and to in- 
troduce him to some of the major themes of Ibn 'Arabl’s cosmology 
and metaphysics in a highly compressed and ciphered form. For that 
reason, it is an excellent entree to Ibn 'Arabl’s writings as a whole. 

The following translation is based on the edition of Denis Gril 
in Annales Islamologiques 17, 1981. A description of the manuscripts 
he used can be found in the Appendix (Edition of the Text). I have 
generally used Muhammad Marmaduke Pickthall’s translation, The 
Glorious Qur’an, for Qur’anic quotations, altering it when necessary 
to reflect Ibn 'Arabl’s interpretation. 

The annotated translation is followed by a commentary that, 
while necessarily far from being conclusive, aims to provide some 
hints in order to make the reader’s voyage in the company of the 
Shaykh a bit less baffling. 


16. See Yahia, Histoire et classification, p. 325. 


20 


TREATISE ON UNIFICATION 


In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Blessings 
upon our master, Muhammad, and upon his family and compan- 
ions. This is a noble treatise in which I have consigned a tremendous 
discourse. 

From my incompleteness to my completeness, and from my 
inclination to my equilibrium 

From my grandeur to my beauty, and from my splendour 1 to 
my majesty 2 

From my scattering to my gathering, and from my exclusion 
to my reunion 3 

From my baseness to my preciousness, and from my stones to 
my pearls 

From my rising to my setting, and from my days to my 
nights 

From my luminosity to my darkness, and from my guidance 
to my straying 

From my perigee to my apogee, and from the base of my 
lance to its tip 4 


1. The words Sana’ (grandeur) znAsana (splendour) form a tajms za’ id, that is, they 
are homonymous save for the addition of the letter hamza to the first term. 

2. Majesty and Beauty are two Divine Attributes that seemingly oppose one an- 
other much as the Kabbalistic sefirot Gevurah (Rigour) and Hesed (Mercy) do. See 
Fut. II. 133, 541, 542; IV. 251, 269. 

3. The terms sudud and wisdl suggest opposing gestures on the part of the Be- 
loved, who at times obstructs union and at times allows it, in keeping with His At- 
tributes of Majesty and Beauty. 

4. Gril points out ( Arbre , p. 36, n. 4), that zijdj and 'await, terms pertaining to the 
measure of a lance, signal “descending and ascending tendencies along an axial line”. 


21 


Treatise on Unification 


From my waxing to my waning, and from the void of my 
moon to its crescent 

From my pursuit to my flight, and from my steed to my 
gazelle 5 

From my breeze to my boughs, and from my boughs to my 
shade 

From my shade to my bliss, and from my bliss to my wrath 6 

From my wrath to my likeness, and from my likeness to my 
impossibility 7 

From my impossibility to my validity, and from my validity 
to my deficiency. 

I am no one in existence but myself, so - 

Whom do I treat as foe and whom do I treat as friend? 

Whom do I call to aid my heart, pierced by a penetrating 
arrow, 

When the archer is my eyelid , 8 striking my heart without an 
arrow ? 9 

Why defend my station? It matters little to me; what do I 
care? 

For I am in love with none other than myself, and my very 
separation is my union . 10 

Do not blame me for my passion. I am inconsolable over the 
one who has fled me. 


5. There is a nice parallel drawn here between the hunter on his steed in pursuit 
of the fleeing gazelle and the poet, who is both hunter and gazelle. 

6. For this translation of mihal, see Q. 13: 13: “He launcheth the thunderbolts 
and smiteth with them whom He will while they dispute concerning Allah, and He is 
mighty in wrath {mihal).” 

7. Muhal, “impossibility”, nicely complements mihal, “wrath”, in the previous 

line. 

8. Jafn, “eyelid”, can also mean “scabbard” or “sheath”. See Lan e, Arabic-English 
Lexicon, Part 2, p.434, s.v.jafn. 

9. The glance of the beloved, who is none other than the poet himself, pierces 
his own heart and causes him to fall in love with himself. 

10. Ibn 'Arab! repeats these lines in Fut. II. 390. 


22 


Treatise on Unification 


In this book I never cease addressing myself about myself and re- 
turning in it to myself from myself. 

From my heaven to my earth, from my exemplary practice to 
my religious duty , 11 

From my pact to my perjury , 12 from my length to my 
breadth . 13 

k k k 


From my sense to my intellect and from my intellect to my 
sense, 

- From whence derive two strange sciences, without doubt or 

confusion. 

From my soul to my spirit and from my spirit to my soul, 

- By means of dissolution and coagulation, like the corpse in 

the tomb . 14 

From my intuition to my knowledge and from my knowledge 
to my intuition, 

- Continuous is the light of knowledge; ephemeral the light 

of intuition. 

From my sanctity to my impurity and from my impurity to 
my sanctity, 

- Sanctity is in my present and impurity is in yesterday. 


11. Fard and sunna are two terms drawn from Islamic law, the first having to do 
with required religious duties, the second with recommended ones, based on the 
Prophet Muhammad’s practice. 

12. The Arabic pair ibrdm and naqd, in addition to the concrete meaning of braid- 
ing and unbraiding a rope, suggests in legal terms the conclusion of a pact and its vio- 
lation. 

13. Tul (length) and 'ard (width) again suggest movement along an axis. Ibn 'Arabl 
was much influenced by al-Hallaj’s esoteric interpretation of this pair of terms. See, 
for example, Fut. I. 169, Chap. 20, in which he attributes to al-Hallaj the notion that 
length has to do with action in the world of spirits and width has to do with action in 
the world of bodies. 

14. These two terms, tahlTl and tarkTb, are, in addition to their common meaning 
of “dissolving” and “composition”, an allusion to the alchemical process. 


23 


Treatise on Unification 


From my human-nature to my jinn-nature, and from my 
jinn-nature to my human-nature, 

- For my jinn-nature seeks to disquiet me and my human- 

nature seeks to set me at ease. 

From the narrowness of my body to the vastness of my soul, 
And from the vastness of my soul to the prison of my body, 

- For my soul denies my intellect and my intellect my soul. 
From my entity to my nonentity, and my nonentity to my 

entity, 

- Where I rejoice to find my composition and lament to find 

my dispersion. 

From my likeness to my opposite and from my opposite to 
my likeness, 

- Were it not for Baqil no light of excellence would shine in 

Quss . 15 

From my sun to my full moon and from my full moon 16 to 
my sun, 

- So that I might bring to light what lies hidden in night’s core. 
From Persian to Arab and from Arab to Persian , 17 

- To explain the mysteries’ roots and express the realities’ 

enigmas. 

From my root to my branch and from my branch to my root, 


15. Quss and Baqil are two semi-legendary pre-Islamic figures. Quss ibn Sa'ida, a 
hamf of Najran, was an orator of the highest rank, and Muhammad committed an 
excerpt of one of his sermons to memory (see Hoyland, Arabia and the Arabs, p. 222). 
Baqil, on the other hand, was a stutterer. The eloquent Quss and the tongue-tied 
Baqil became proverbial (see Gril, Arbre, p. 39, n. 12). 

16. The Perfect Human Being is sometimes compared to the full moon, which 
reflects the sun (the Real) most completely. 

17. Although the terms 'urb and furs refer to the peoples designated by these 
names, there is another sense here of things that are clearly stated (from the root 
r -R-B) versus unintelligible (from another name for the Persians: al-'ajam). See Gril’s 
note {Arbre, p.39, n. 13): “These two terms refer to the state of non-manifestation 
or of revelation of divine mysteries to which two modes of expression correspond: 
allusion ( ishdra ) and clear expression {' ibdra). Ibn 'Arab! employs mu' jam (front 
'ajaml) and mu'rab (from 'arabt) in the same sense.” 


24 


Treatise on Unification 

- For the sake of a life that was buried in death, animate or 
inanimate. 

Pay no heed, my soul, to the words of that jealous spite- 
monger, 

Or to the remarks of that ignorant presumer, O myrtle of 
my soul! 

How many ignoramuses have slandered us spiritual beings! 

While my revelation descends from the Spirit of inspiration 
and sanctity, 

He is like a man possessed by a demon whose touch makes 
him tremble . 18 

On the matter of spiritual realization mankind does not 
cease to err, 

For God’s secret is poised between the shout and the 
whisper. 

I have called this treatise “Cosmic unification in the presence of es- 
sential witnessing, through the assembling of the Fluman Tree and 
the Four Spiritual Birds.” I have dedicated it to Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr 
ibn Sinan, master of the reins of generosity and eloquence. I seek help 
from God. He is my support and my assistance, glory be to him ! 19 


18. See Q.2:275: “Those who swallow usury cannot rise up save as he ariseth 
whom the devil hath prostrated by [his] touch.” 

19. I have chosen to place all third-person singular pronouns in lower case in light 
of the ambiguous nature of the divine-human relationship in this treatise. There is 
additional justification for this in that Arabic pronouns, even when referring to the 
Divinity, are not indicated by capital letters. 


25 


Treatise on Unification 


Dedication 

To the third and the second - the master of the triads and dyads 
- the one alluded to in the doubled words of praise , 20 the evanes- 
cent conqueror who restrains his mount, the one who turns toward 
his shadow and bows his head in humility; the generous one whose 
generosity never runs dry, the perfect being whose existence is not 
known, the one who is sent from the two divine presences and the 
envoy of the two powers; he whose foundations are certain, whose 
possibility is discounted, and whose place is known; channel of sub- 
tle graces, reality of time, goal of faith, seat of Mercy, subtlety of the 
moment, sultan of men and jinn, Jann son of jinn , 21 pupil of man’s 
eye, beneficent giver, Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr b. Sinan, master of the 
reins of generosity and eloquence. I ask God to give him the most 
perfect and elevated of ranks. 

May he receive the scent of the most perfect and the most pure of 
greetings, as well as the mercy and benedictions of God, the most 
Exalted. 


20. As Gril mentions, this refers to the opening snra of the Qur’an, the Fatiha, 
often called “the seven doubled” or “oft-repeated” since it contains seven lines and is 
recited repeatedly in every ritual prayer. According to Ibn 'Arabi, the Perfect Human 
Being “opens” or initiates (fataha) existence just as the Fatiha opens the Qur’an. See 
Gril, Arbre, p. 10. The inner structure of the Fatiha is based on a division of the sura 
into two parts, one of which belongs to the Lord and one to the servant. At the same 
time, it is a synthesis of the entire Qur’an. These three aspects are echoed in the first 
verse of the Fatiha: “In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassion- 
ate”. The Name Allah embraces all Divine Names and Attributes while All-Merciful 
and All-Compassionate express nuanced modalities of Mercy ( rahma ). See Fut. I. 102, 
Chap. 5. 

21. Arabic: Jann ibn Jann .Jann is a plural of jinm, the shape-shifting, fiery spirits 
mentioned frequently in the Qur’an. It also can mean “father of the jinn” (see Lane, 
Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 2, p.462, s .v.jann) or “a small white serpent, a great ser- 
pent, or a species of serpent having black-bordered eyes, inclining to yellow, harm- 
less, and abounding in houses” (Lane, A?'abic-English Lexicon, Part 2, p. 464, s.v.jann). 
Jann with this meaning is found twice in the Qur’an (Q.27: 10; 28: 31) in connection 
with Moses’ staff: “But when he saw it writhing like a jann, he turned to flee headlong.” 


26 


Dedication 


I praise God who has “fashioned” me and “balanced” me , 22 and 
cast me in “the most beautiful of constitutions ”. 23 For he made me 
know myself through myself and caused me to appear to myself, so 
that I became enamoured of only myself. Between my distance and 
my proximity I have become mad with love for myself, and I address 
myself alone. 

Were I to see myself when I came to myself by myself, 
secretly or openly, 

And said, “Greetings” and answered, “At your service”, 

And if my turning were from me to me, 

My very “Flere I am!” would annihilate me from myself, 

From my enemies and my trusty friends, 

From my threat [of punishment] and my surplus [grace] , 

From my delight and my promises [of paradise] , 

From my witnessing and my testimony. 

What wonderful favour would be mine through myself! 

Oh I! Return me by me to me until I see my stability, 
lie returned me by me to me from me, and only my qualities 
subsisted in me. 

My palm grasped my stick, my staff smote my rock; 

The river of constellations flowed from it: Twelve heralds ! 24 


22. See Q. 82: 7-8: “Who created thee, then fashioned, then proportioned thee, 
into whatsoever form He will, He casteth thee.” 

23. Q.95:4: “Surely We created man in the most beautiful of constitutions.” 

24. See Q.2:60: “And when Moses asked for water for his people, We said: Smite 
with thy staff the rock. And there gushed out therefrom twelve springs [so that] each 
tribe knew their drinking place.” See also Q. 7:60: “We divided them into twelve 
tribes, nations; and We inspired Moses, when his people asked him for water, saying: 
Smite with thy staff the rock! And there gushed forth therefrom twelve springs, so 
that each tribe knew their drinking-place.” See also Fut. II. 441, where the rivers 
mentioned in the verse are placed within the three different Gardens of Paradise: 
four in the Garden of the Elites, four in the Garden of Inheritance, and four in the 
Garden of Deeds. The rivers are then assigned various types of sciences. The river of 
unbrackish water = the science of life; the river of wine = the science of states; the river 
of honey = the science of revelation; and the river of milk = the science of the secrets. 


2 7 


Treatise on Unification 


I said to myself: Oh I! Add constancy to my constancy! 

These are the sciences of life, scattering light from all that 
grows upon my being. 

Where in me does that subtle secret reside that God has 
placed within my essences? 

I was filled with what I sought from myself, but my desire for 
death remained. 

I took to complaining to myself of my passion so that my 
signs would appear 

Upon my eyelids from the essence of my creation. 

Then he lavished gathering on my scattering. 

My essence conjoined passionately with my essence, 
for my essence, my whole life long. 

I did not hold my harshness against myself, 

Or the length of my abandonment or my misdeeds - 

I am my beloved and my lover; I am my knight and 
my maiden . 25 

This book came to me from the city situated on the equator, assigned 
to the temperate clime , 26 fortified by [spiritual] powers: Mount 
Sinai, the Land Made Safe , 27 fashioned of water and clay , 28 uniting 
the “most beautiful of constitutions” with the “lowest of degrees”. 
This treatise informed me of what passed between myself and myself 
and what my existence contemplated of my existence. 


25. Ibn 'Arab! repeats these lines in Fut. II. 390. 

26. Arabic: mustawa. Gril ( Arbre , p.44, n. 29): “The line of the equator or the 
equinoxes cuts in its centre the horizontal plane of manifestation ( mustawa ) or the 
place of the divine establishment on the Throne ( al-istiwii ’ 'ala l-'arsh).” 

27. Mecca. According to Gril (Arbre, p. 44, n.30), Mount Sinai = “the most beauti- 
ful of constitutions”, that is the Perfect Human Being who is created upon the divine 
form; the Land Made Safe = Mecca, at the heart of which is the cube of the Ka'ba, 
draped in its black covering. For dark things being ideal receptacles for divine lights 
and secrets, see our Commentary, p. 103. This passage relates particularly to Q. 95 : 1-5 : 
“By the fig, by the olive, by Mount Sinai, by this land made safe. Surely We created man 
of the most beautiful constitution. Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low.” 

28. See Q. 6:2; 15:26; 25:54. 


28 


Dedication 


When the signs of witnessing were lifted from me and the suf- 
fering of spiritual combat was removed, and harmony and succour 
began to flow through me, I mounted the Buraq 29 of my spiritual 
aspiration and departed from the cycle of this grief. I fell into the 
sea of hylic matter, and beheld the next world and the present one . 30 
I said: “May he perish, whoever denies the gardens and the abode 
of life, the sporting boys and embracing houris , 31 and the union of 
bodies with bodies! He who sees the Preserver affirms the exist- 
ence of the Speaker, for the line of equilibrium does not waver.” I 
understood here that those who deny the resurrection of the body 
will continue to waver and will never be rid of the noose of the four 
and the two . 32 

Then I shouted: “Oh alas!” and “Alas, my burning heart. I fled 
from the universe and here I am in it. Where is what I seek? ” 

I heard a voice coming from me - but neither inside me nor out- 
side me - say: “Why do you demand a high station when you are on 
the road? What have you to do with the sittings [on the Throne ]? 33 
What have you to do with the celestial couches and sublime litters ? 34 
What have you to do with the uppermost horizon ? 35 What have you 


29. Fabulous steed on which the Prophet rode on his Night Journey to the highest 
heavens. For the mystic, it is often linked to the initial stages of the Path, when spiritual 
concentration and correct intention are of particular importance. 

30. The vision of heaven and hell takes place in the Barzakh. See Commentary, 
p. 79. Note that one variant reads: “I fell into the sea of destruction and beheld he who 
affirms and he who denies.” 

31. For the beautiful women of Paradise, see Q.44: 54; 52:20; 55:72; 56:22. 

32. Four and two are both even numbers that are polarized without resolution. 
Among the four things that have such an antagonistic relationship to one another are 
the four elements. Some of the Divine Names are also polarized, for example Fie who 
gives life and Fie who causes death, and are metaphorically engaged in “disputing 
with” one another. See, for example, Flit. I, Chap. 56; Fut. II, Chap. 73, question 86; 
Fut. II, Chap. 154; Fut. Ill, Chaps 306, 336. 

33. Arabic plural: istiwa'at. See Q. 53:6 and Gril’s note ( Arbre , p.46, n. 35): “Istiwa’ 
is thus for the creature the equilibrium between contrary tendencies and the deliver- 
ance from existential limits.” 

34. See Q. 55:76: “Reclining on green cushions and fair carpets.” 

35. See Q. 53:7: “When he was on the uppermost horizon.” 


29 


Treatise on Unification 


to do with the screens of splendour? What have you to do with the 
radiant curtain? What have you to do with the Cloud ? 56 What have 
you to do with the impenetrable Veil of Sublimity ? 37 What have you 
to do with the absolute ipseities? What have you to do with the con- 
firmed realities? What have you to do with the presence of allusions? 
What have you to do with the conversations? What have you to do 
with the nightly confidences? What have you to do with the sublime 
Tree? What have you to do with the branches of the world? What 
have you to do with the strange Anqa ’? What have you to do with 
the Ringdove? What have you to do with the Jet-Black Crow? What 
have you to do with the Royal Eagle? O you who are veiled, how can 
you ask ‘where?’ about the Essence, when you are in a station that 
does not admit lies!” 

I answered: “Oh you who rebuke me, your words have wounded 
me . 38 Do you not know that you speak from your own station? You 
are in the presence of the Essence, divested of time and place, while 
I am in this dark 39 abyss , 40 in this black gloom and this fearful calam- 
ity , 41 in this mine of lies and doubt, this place of faults and defects. 
Does the prisoner of quantity and the one confined to wise maxims 
not cry out: Woe! If you extract me from the crashing waves and 
deliver me from the struggles of this gloomy night I will never more 
pronounce an adverb or stop at a particle.” 

Through his irresistible power he attracted me to himself and said 
to me: “You are vanquished, so seek help !” 42 


36. The Cloud is referred to in a hadith in which, before creation, God is said to 
have been in a Cloud above and below which there was no air. 

37. S eeFut. I, Chap. 73, question 153 : “ it is blindness and perplexity.” None can 

penetrate it and gain knowledge of God’s Essence. 

38. The root K-L-M has to do with both speech and wounding. For this latter, see 
Ibn 'Arabl’s discussion of the Prophet Idris as the Healer of Wounds ( MudawT al- 
kulum ), Fut. I, Chap. 14. 

39. The root '-M-Y conveys the sense of blindness and obscurity. The word 
' immiyya also means “trial”, “slaughter”, and “conflict.” See Lane, Arabic-English 
Lexicon, Part 5, p. 2162, s.v. 'immiyya. 

40. Lujja can also mean “sea”. 

41. In Arabic, the expression uses two words front the same root: dahiya al-dahyd. 


30 


Dedication 


I said: “I will save myself by your right hand, for both your hands 
are right hands . 43 For he is the powerful, the trustworthy, the faith- 
ful, and the true one who never lies.” 

He said: “How can one mock me whose hope abides in me?” 

I said: “Just like one who praises you bestows favour upon you.” 

When he attracted me to himself I saw myself in another form 
than my previous one. I established myself there and took a firm 
position. 

I said: “Oh I!” 

He said: “I, welcome!” 

I said: “No welcome, no greetings, no make yourself at ease!” 

He said: “Oh eye-balm, what is disquieting you? Oh prisoner of 
creation, what is afflicting you?” 

I answered: “You do not cease from veiling me from myself. Un- 
veil me to myself so that I can know myself! Here is my tablet out- 
spread, my banner is raised, my knowledge is delimited, my station 
is praised, my secret self 44 is witnessed, my heart 45 is found, the goal 
I seek is lost, and I, in my world, am what is sought . 46 I am called 
the word of existence . 47 If these entities were to become annihilated, 
if these creatures were to vanish, and if I were to retreat from the 
Throne of Mercy and the lordly name, I would be able to enjoy the 
divine regard and not be harmed by this favour .” 48 

42. See Q. 54:10: “So he [Noah] cried unto his Lord, saying: I am vanquished, so 
give help ! ” 

43. Reference to a hadith: “Both the hands of my Lord are blessed right hands.” 

44. Arabic: sirr. Another meaning is the innermost part of the heart. 

45. Arabic: lubb. The kernel, or inner part of the heart. 

46. The text gives “ ma'bud ” (worshipped), but I translate according to the variant. 
See the Universal Tree’s discourse, p. 37, n.79, where the Tree describes himself as 
the “intended meaning”. 

47. This refers to the Arabic word Kun (Bel), God’s Word that brought all 
creation into existence. The Universal Tree also gives this as one of his epithets. See 
p. 38, n. 80. 

48. Gril ( Arbre , p.49, n.49), points out the qualities that the Perfect Human 
Being must have in order to accomplish his spiritual goal. This paragraph contains 
references to the prophetic accoutrements: banner ( livid ’) and praised station ( maqam 
mahmud). 


31 


Treatise on Unification 


He said: “The pens have been spent, the signs have gone away, the 
names have departed, the Throne has been veiled, the tablets have 
been put away, and the hearts and spirits have been lost. But these 
are necessary: the dark-green 49 gloom of the Garden, the sphere of 
water, the Supreme Pen, the first step, the hidden letter nun, so and 
the guarded right hand.” 51 

When I heard that there was still a trace of createdness before me, 
I feared that it would cut me off from my cognizance. So I rose from 
that gloomy darkness, leaving the Buraq of my aspiration in it. I was 
transported to the thrones of subtle grace and the couches 52 of the 
celestial cushions, 53 until I reached the station of rejoicing where I 
set myself to oscillate like a hanging lamp. 54 1 said: “What have I to 
do with the state of audition?” 55 

Someone said: “It is the beauty of the rhythm that has set you in 
motion.” 


49. Possible reference to Q. 55 : 64. 

50. The letter nun is found at the beginning of Sura 70 of the Qur’an, called “The 
Pen”. 

51. The right hand moves the Supreme Pen. 

52. Arabic: muttakd’dt. See Q. 12: 31: “And when she [Zulaykha] heard of their sly 
talk, she sent for them and prepared for them a cushioned couch.” 

53. Arabic: rafarif. See Q.55:76: “Reclining on green cushions ( rafraf) and 
fair carpets.” Note also that rafrafa means to flutter like a bird, hence the rafraf was 
sometimes considered to be one of the vehicles Muhammad was transported in on his 
celestial ascensions. 

54. See also Ibn 'Arabl’s Risalat al-anwar ; p. 189; English trans. (Harris, Lord of 
Power) p.47. See also notes from al-Jill’s Commentary of R. al-anwar, entitled al-Isfar 
'an risalat al-anwar, translated in Lord of Power, p. 88, n.21: “Know ... that this place is 
a stage demanding the greatest courage from seekers. For if they arrive in it and this 
oneness manifests itself to them . . . they suppose that they have arrived in the Pres- 
ence of the Unity and triumphed in the essential revelation. This is because of the 
divine bliss they find in this stage and the fact that any reality other than their own is 
absent from it.” 

55. Arabic: sama . Gril ( Arbre , p. 50, n. 52) notes that audition for Ibn 'Arab! con- 
sists of two sorts: one in which the hearer delights in the harmonies and rhythms of 
sensible melodies and songs; the other in which the hearer is absorbed in the supra- 
sensible realm and does not engage in movement at all. See Put. I. 210-11 and Fut. II. 
366-9. 


32 


Dedication 


I said: “I didn’t feel it.” 

Someone said to me: “Be careful! For you are with yourself and 
not with him! ” 

I said: “Reality is beyond the rhythms of song. What it demands 
is extinction within extinction.” 

Then a veil was lowered between my essence and its Essence and 
a state came between me and it. 

Then he said to me: “Where are you, do you belong to the world 
or to me?” 

I said: “[I am] between drudgery and desire. My goal is the blind- 
ing Cloud 56 while I am in the water. My spirit is in the heavens while 
my throne is in the primordial Dust and my family is in Saba . 57 My 
kingdom is in the Throne and my authority in the two feet of equiv- 
alence . 58 My constellation is in the celestial sphere , 59 my veil is in the 
angel, my obscurity is in prime matter, and my trial is in this world . 60 
My beginning is the first state 61 while my end is the next world. My 
intimacy is in the intimate friend Abraham; my conversations are in 
Moses, who spoke with God; my vicegerency is in Aaron, the sage; 
my elevation is in Idris; my form is in Joseph; my knowledge in its 
diversity and multiplicity is in Jesus; my body is in Adam, the father 
of mankind; my heart is from Abraham, the greatest of masters; and 
my physical frame is in the four elements .” 62 


56. A reference to a much-cited hadith. The Prophet Muhammad was asked, 
“Where was our Lord before He created the creatures?” He answered: “He was in a 
Cloud, neither above which nor below which was there any air.” Ibn 'Arab! explains 
that the Cloud is “the nearest of existent things to God” {Put. II. 310). Within it the 
cosmos takes shape. 

57. See Q.27:22; 34:15. 

58. The two feet of equivalence ( satoa ’) are found at the level of the Footstool 
( al-kurst ). It is at this level that the cosmos is polarized into opposing Names and 
Attributes. 

59. Arabic \fulk and falak, whose orthography is identical. 

60. Literally, the first. This world, as contrasted to the “last” world mentioned in 
the following line. 

61. See Q. 79: 10—11: “Shall we really be restored to our first state even after we are 
crumbled bones?” 

62. The seven prophets enumerated in this series are the same ones encountered 

33 


Treatise on Unification 


He said: “That is your portion from my creation, but where is 
your portion from my essence?” 

I said: “Oh you, who speak by allusion! Relationship exists either 
with something contrary or something similar, and when the similar 
is inherent [to this relationship] it is inherent essentially and neces- 
sarily.” 

The one who speaks by allusion said: “I mean the relationship of 
the similar.” 

I said: “My trace is yours and my attribute is yours. Summation 
is better than particularization 63 in this manner, for the sake of the 
Wayfarers.” 

He said: “You’ve spoken correctly. But where is the relationship of 
the contrary, according to reality, not according to equivocation?” 

I said: “In my non-existence is your existence and in my avarice 
is your generosity; in your speech is my muteness and in your dis- 
course is my bell-peal. In my impossibility is your eternity and in my 
beginning is your precedence.” 

He said: “I know now that you know. How excellent is your judge- 
ment!” 

Then the Universal Tree of the garden, described as the Like- 
ness , 64 was unveiled to me. I observed a tree “whose root is firm and 


by the Prophet Muhammad during his mi' raj. They are associated with seven planets 
and seven attributes: Saturn - Abraham - intimacy; Jupiter - Moses - face-to-face- 
conversation; Mars - Aaron - vicegerency; Sun - Idris - elevation; Venus - Joseph - 
form of beauty; Mercury - Jesus - diverse sciences; Moon - Adam - body. 

It is odd that Abraham should be mentioned twice, occurring both at the head and 
the foot of the list. It may be, as Stephen Hirtenstein has suggested to me, that when 
the Real, in descending through the levels of existence, reaches the lowest heaven, 
that of the Moon, It is met by the heart of the Perfect Human Being, symbolized here 
by Abraham, the custodian of the heart. The heart, in turn, is the synthesizing spir- 
itual organ in which the four elements combine. In the mi' raj literature, Abraham’s 
place is the Visited House (al-Bayt al-Ma’mur), the celestial equivalent of the Ka'ba, 
whose microcosmic equivalent is the heart of the believer. See Hirtenstein, “The 
Brotherhood of Milk”. 

63. Arabic: tafsTl. For these two opposing terms, described in terms of the Supreme 
Pen and the Preserved Tablet, see Fut. I. 295; Fut. II. 283. 


34 


Discourse of the Universal Tree 


whose branches are in the heavens .” 65 Its fruit is in the hand of the 
Deity, who sits upon the Throne. Among its branches sat the Crow 
and the strange 'Anqa\ and in the shelter of its boughs perched the 
Eagle and the Ringdove. I greeted the Tree and it answered, greet- 
ing me even more finely. It said: “Listen, O wayfarer, O king.” 


Discourse of the Universal Tree, 

Described as the Likeness 

I am the Universal Tree of synthesis and likeness. I have deep roots 
and my branches are lofty. The hand of the One 66 planted me in the 
garden of eternity, protected from the vicissitudes of time. I have 
spirit and body. My fruit is gathered with no hand touching it. These 
fruits contain more sciences and knowledge than sound intellects and 
subtle hearts can bear. My leaves are “raised couches ”, 67 my fruits are 
not “out of reach nor yet forbidden ”. 68 My centre is the desired goal. 
My branches perpetually draw nigh and come down . 69 Some come 
down to provide benefit and aid, while some draw nigh gradually to 
bestow favour. My constitution is like the celestial sphere in round- 
ness and my branches are homes to the winged spirits. My flowers 
are like the stars whose course engenders the minerals, flowing in 
their bodies. 

I am the Tree of light, speech, and the eye-balm of Moses , 70 upon 
whom be peace. Of directions mine is the most excellent right- 

64. Arabic: ?nithliyya. The Perfect Human Being is often described as being the 
likeness ( mithl ), since he was created upon the form of the Real. 

65. Q. 14:24. 

66. The Tree was planted by God’s one hand while Adam was created with God’s 
two hands. 

67. Q. 56:34. 

68. Q. 56:33. 

69. See Q. 53: 8. 

70. See Q.20:10; 27:7-8; 28:29-30. Moses was in search of fire for his family 
when he chanced upon the Burning Bush. 


35 


Treatise on Unification 


handed one, of places mine is the holy valley. 71 Of times mine is the 
instant. Of dwelling places, mine is the equator 72 and the temperate 
climes. 73 1 have perpetuity, everlastingness, and felicity without mis- 
ery. The fruits of my two gardens are near to hand 74 and my bough 
sways loftily as if intoxicated. It bestows grace and tenderness on all 
living creatures. My branches always offer frankincense to the spir- 
its of the Guarded Tablet, and my foliage is a protection for them 
against the diurnal rays. My shade extends over those whom God 
envelops in his solicitude and my wings are spread over the people of 
sainthood. The spirit-winds blow on me from many different direc- 
tions 75 and disarrange the order of my branches. From this entangle- 
ment one hears such melodious sounds. They enrapture the supreme 
intellects in the utmost heights and set them running on the course 
inscribed upon their scroll. 

I am the music of wisdom that removes care through the beauty of 
its rhythmic song. I am the luminous light. Mine is the green carpet 
and the most resplendent round face. Assisted by the powers and en- 
nobled by the one who is seated on the Throne, I have become like 
prime matter, 76 receiving all forms in the afterworld and the present 
one. I am not too narrow to bear anything! I am never apart from 
a faithful light that shines upon me; it consoles the one who leans 
upon me. 


71. See Q. 20: 12; 79: 16. It was from the right side of the valley that the tree called 
to Moses (Q.28: 30). 

72. Arabic: khatt al-istiwa’. The word “istiiva”’ is also associated with the All- 
Merciful’s sitting on the Throne (Q. 20:5). 

73. Arabic: i'tidal al-arkcin. It can also mean “moderation of elements”. The 
sense here is that the Tree is positioned in the centre of creation, the pivot-point of 
existence. 

74. See Q. 55: 54: “... the fruit of both gardens near to hand.” Note the alliteration 
here : janajannatayya. 

75. Arabic: bi-ikhtildfi tasdrifihd, literally, with the opposition of their vicissitudes. 
The sense here is of the opposing attributes of the Divine Names. 

76. See Commentary, p. 96, for the relationship between the Perfect Human 
Being and Prime Matter. 


36 


Discourse of the Universal Tree 


I am the “spreading shade ”, 77 the clustered plantains , 78 the intended 
meaning , 79 the word of existence , 80 the most noble of originated 
beings, the most transcendent of limited beings. My power is un- 
surpassable, my place most holy, my lamp most elevated . 81 I am 
the source from which issue the lights, the synthesis of the divine 
words , 82 the mine of secrets and wisdoms. 

Mine are the vast earth and the heavens. 

In my centre are equivalence and straightness . 83 
Mine are the firmly-rooted 84 majesty, the splendour, 

The secret of the worlds, and the exaltation . 85 
When thoughts betake themselves to my essence 
The distance and the blinding Cloud bewilder them. 


77. Q. 56:30. 

78. Q. 56:29. 

79. Arabic: al-mana al-maqsud. A possible reference to the offspring of dyadic 
oppositions, the “singularity” {fardiyya ) that equilibrates contraries. Thus, for ex- 
ample, in the syllogism, it is the conclusion, the “third thing” that results from the 
“cosmic marriage” of two premises. In alchemy, it is the gold that is the product of 
the marriage of sulphur and mercury (see Fut. II. 270, Chap. 167). For more on the 
cosmic marriage, see Commentary, p. 103. 

80. A reference to God’s cosmogonic word: Be! 

81. A reference to Q. 24: 35-6. 

82. The Prophet Muhammad is called by this epithet. 

83. Arabic: al-sawa’ wa-l-istiuid’ . These two terms suggest ontological levels as 
well as the ideas of straightness, likeness, and moderation. The first is often equated 
with the Footstool, the second with the Throne upon which the All-Merciful sits (see 
Q. 20:5). As Gril remarks ( Arhre , p. 56, n. 72), sawa’ has been defined by Ibn 'Arabl in 
his Istildhdt as “the occultation of God in the creature and the creature in God.” See 
also Fut. II. 128, Chap. 73, which has the same definition, adding: “This is only in one 
who knows that he is a locus of manifestation for the Real.” 

84. Arabic: muaththal. The word conveys the sense not only of being firmly 
rooted but also suggests permanence. The athl is a kind of tamarisk tree, mentioned 
in the Qur’an (Q. 34: 16) in connection with the gardens of Saba (Sheba). 

85. Also: ascension, as one ascends the throne. 


37 


Treatise on Unification 


No one in the universe knows my existence 
Save one undelimited by praise . 86 
He disposes over and governs us. 

The choice is his 87 - he does what he wills . 88 


Discourse of the Ringdove 

When the Ringdove heard the Universal Tree’s discourse and the 
eternal knowledge it brought forth, she uttered a cry in the garden 
of her sanctity, declaring about herself: 

When God wished to bring my creation into existence, he made 
me contemplate my own essence; he encircled my neck with the ring 
of splendour and he gave me the “Lote Tree of the Limit ” 89 as a 
dwelling place. He called to the Eagle, assuring him that he would 
be preserved from punishment . 90 The Eagle, who was in the court- 
yard 91 in front of his door, answered obediently: “Your call is heard.” 
Lie told him: “Now you are in exile, even though you remain in 
the locus of my proximity. I am not of your kind, so you must feel 
lonely. But in you is eye-balm. Make her appear in reality. Enjoy 92 


86. It is impossible to praise God as befits Him, by any quality or Name, since 
“every one of His names known to us is assumed by the servant as his own trait and 
by it he becomes qualified to the measure that is appropriate for him” ( Fut . III. 148; 
trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 71) . As Chittick adds, parenthetically, “Hence there is no 
name worthy of God’s unique Essence.” 

87. Literally: “He is the Chooser” ( al-mukhtar ). 

88. Q. 3:40; 14:27; 22: 18: “Allah doth what He will.” This line is repeated in Fut. 
IV. 198 at the end of a poem on the Lordly Presence. 

89. See Q. 53: 13-16. 

90. A play on words here. “Punishment” (' iqaba) is from the same root as “eagle” 
{'uqab). 

91. Another play on words, in that fina’ (courtyard) and fana' (annihilation) are 
from the same root F-N-Y. The Supreme Pen is often said to have been singled out 
from among the Enraptured Angels, who are annihilated in the beauty and majesty 
of the Real. See, for example, Fut. I, Chap. 13; I. 295. 

92. From the same root as “soul” ( nafs ) and “breath” ( nafas ). 

38 


Discourse of the Ringdove 


her company and be cheered by her conversation, because familiar- 
ity with me is impossible, for I am ‘mighty in power ’.” 93 

The Eagle asked: “How can something be manifested from me 
when my station is weakness and my power and might have no 
authority? ” 

He answered him: “Continue to call plaintively and that very one 
will appear before you, face to face. This is the second harmony and 
union through doubling.” 

The Eagle obeyed. He doubled his plaint and I appeared; the Real 
called me and I hastened. The Eagle, however, had not understood 
what was happening, since he was preoccupied with the dower and 
my coming into existence from his loins. When he heard me respond 
to the divine call, he asked: “What is this that has appeared?” 

As soon as he had seen me, he fell in love with me. The beauty 
God had surrounded 94 me with made him mad with love. Passion 
made him groan with pain: “I’m burning! I’m drowning!” He was 
like a nightingale, warbling his plaint , 95 trying to heal his condition, 
but the burning only became more extensive and solace more impos- 
sible. I would not permit him to kiss me, although his cure was in 
lying with me and embracing me. The veils of doubt were raised, and 
from behind the pavilions of the Unseen someone called: “What is 
wrong with you that you don’t regard her lineaments and the per- 
formance of her song? Why have you not looked upon her qualities 
and the marvels of her wisdom?” 

He called me to him. “Here I am!” I responded. Ele commanded 
me to sit before him. He said: “I was so inflamed with ardour at your 
form that I overlooked the knowledge of your spiritual qualities. 


93. Q. 13:13. Note the paronomasia between muhal (impossible) and ?tiihal 
(power). 

94. Arabic : tawwaqanT. It could also mean “he embraced me”. 

95. Arabic: balbala bulbulun balbalahu. A fine play of words here on words from the 
quadriliteral root B-L-B-L, meaning “nightingale” {bulbul), to disquiet {balbala), and 
anxiety ( balbal ), which the author complements by ending the following line with bal 
(mind /state). 


39 


Treatise on Unification 


The divine order has come that you make yourself known to me and 
that a ray of your sunlight shine for me.” 

I said: “God has brought me into existence from you, face to face . 96 
And he has made me manifest from your loins, following our incli- 
nation for one another. I emanate from your power and am mani- 
fested through your form. God has entrusted me with two realities 
and has given me two subtle threads : 97 one reality by which I know 
and one reality by which I bring into existence what I wish by means 
of its occasion . 98 One thread is attached to you; it is sent down to me 
when I desire you and draws me to your presence. The second joins 
me to him and is sent down to me when he calls me to him.” 

When he heard that a subtle thread extended from me to him, 
and having verified the realities of love, the Eagle descended toward 
me along this thread. My essence mingled with his , 99 my qualities 
disappeared into his, and we were absorbed in the pleasures of union, 
cheered by the attainment of harmony. The spiritual wedding took 
place. The two waters flowed together in the womb of the moment, 
which received them in virtue of that divine wisdom that bestows 
grace to some and accords misery to others . 100 The lover recovered 
from his malady and found rest in a desire to answer the divine call. 
Wavering between two desires, he set in the two wests and rose in 
the two easts . 101 


96. Arabic: ' inda al-taqabul. The sense is both of facing and opposing. 

97. Arabic: raqjqa. See Commentary, pp. 85-6. 

98. Arabic: sabab. This means the secondary cause, the primary cause being God 
who, in reality, is the only true cause. 

99. See our Commentary, pp.53-4, regarding the possibility of the intermin- 
gling (here imtizaj ) of essences. 

100. Arabic: man hurima wa-man ruhima, literally “one who is refused and one 
who is accorded mercy”. Note the transposition of the letters ha’ and rd’ to give op- 
posite meanings. As Gril notes ( Arbre , p. 14), the Eagle represents the pole of severity 
and the Ringdove the pole of mercy, already inherent in the right and left branches of 
the Tree. 

101. See Q. 55: 17: “Lord of the two easts, and Lord of the two wests.” The exo- 
teric sense of “two easts” may refer to the extreme points where the sun rises in winter 
and summer, while the “two wests” may be the extreme points where the sun sets in 


40 


Discourse of the Ringdove 


When he had recovered from his suffering and had departed to 
his abode, I found in myself a fullness that I had never before known. 
The paths and roads to him were blocked. The divine thread moved 
and I said: “Oh, my God. What is this that has befallen me?” 

He said: “Exhale 102 when you mention me so that the word of my 
command may manifest from you.” 

So I exhaled like one oppressed. And there was the Anqd’, who 
filled my refuge with life. Ask the Anqd’ about herself and she will 
tell you what God has deposited in her of his subtle graces and what 
he has given to her of knowledge. 

I am the Dove of oft-repeated praises . 103 

My dwelling is in the Garden of spiritual meanings. 

I am an essence in the entities. I have nothing but dualities. 

They call me “O second!” - but I am not second. 

Everything in creation ends up at my existence. 

I come after the one whose essence is too high for sight. 

My authority is useful to those most far and near. 


summer and winter. See Pickthall, Glorious Qur’an, p. 590, and Yusuf 'Ali, Meaning of 
the Glorious Qur’an, p. 1474, n.5184. The latter adds “extreme” to qualify the points 
and says that they include all points in between. Hence God is everywhere. Addi- 
tional esoteric meanings are given by Ibn 'Arabl in another early work, the 'Anqa’ 
mughrih. The east in general is associated with the world of manifestation, while the 
west is associated with the world of transcendence (see Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, 
p. 493). With respect to the two solar risings, he says: “Even as the sun necessarily 
changes its time of rising and shifts its place - similarly your own ‘Sun’ must rise 
upon the exterior of your physical constitution. And know that the sun, by an inher- 
ent [motion] is constantly circulating from the west to the east, even as it proceeds by 
[compulsion from] another from the east to the west, though sight is unable [to per- 
ceive the former movement] and the mind is staggered [by its computation]. But it 
must be that one day [the Sun rising from the West] will openly manifest its [inher- 
ent] movement [eastwards] and [freely] bestow its blessing.” (Trans. Elmore, Islamic 
Sainthood, p. 487.) Note: the sun’s rising in the west is a sign of the Mahdi’s coming. 

102. This command suggests the Breath of the All-Merciful, which relieves the 
non-existent fixed entities ( al-a'ydn al-thdbita) from the distress of their latent possi- 
bility by bringing them into existence. 

103. Arabic: mathdnj. See Commentary, pp.87-8. 


41 


Treatise on Unification 


I have no likeness save one whose nature is similar to mine. 
Reproach me if you wish for what my tongue brings forth: 
Beautiful realities descend upon threads 
Toward the hearts that turn from the ornaments of the 
gardens 

In search of the one who transcends the vicissitudes of time, 
lie is the singular, the exalted. No second shares his 
authority. 

He is the one who elected me; 

He is the one who selected me. 

lie has placed me in equilibrium between pot and potter . 104 
I banish every distant one and draw each near one closer. 

I befriend every friend and I afflict all the wretched. 

When I swoop down low, it is with the spirit of diffusing, 
And when I rise high above, bodily constitutions dissolve. 

It is I who confer sense and leave the inhabited places 
deserted . 105 


Discourse of the Royal Eagle 

When the Eagle heard what the Ringdove had mentioned and what 
she had related about the certain sciences, he said: “What she has 
affirmed is true. She has disclosed to you all the sciences she encom- 
passes.” 

I said to him: “Fly through the air of your eloquence and tell 
us clearly about your nature.” The throne of the Eagle shook. He 
flapped his wings joyfully and said: 


104. Arabic: bayna dann wa-dannan. Dann is literally an earthen wine-jar with a 
tapered bottom. See Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon , Part 3, p.918, s.v. dami. Both the 
imagery and the Arabic root D-N-N suggest the soul’s intermediate station between 
God the Craftsman and His product here below, al-dunyd. 

105. Arabic: maghdm. See Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 6, p.2304, s.v. 
maghnan. The sense here is of a place whose inhabitants were satisfied but then 
departed from or were removed from it. 


42 


Discourse of the Royal Eagle 


I am the Eagle. 

To me belong the most elevated station, beauty, and the 
most brilliant shining light. 

I carry out everything according to its determined rank 
On this world’s shores, but my power is more inaccessible. 

I am his sublime effusion, the light of his existence. 

I am he who summons existence and it obeys. 

I am the one who never ceases to be the “handful” of my 
creator , 106 

The instrument of his openhandedness. 

The realities hurry toward me to seek their fill . 107 
I give to and withhold from whomever I wish. 

If I approach, the beauty of his being dazzles me. 

If I retreat, his most magnificent splendour summons me. 
Approach confers upon me a pleasing wisdom 
But it rends the heart of the high one. 

Distance invests me with an apportioned command 
Whose light illuminates their borders . 108 
When I am distant I am the commander - 
My misery is in my command and my felicity when it is 
removed. 

The most pleasing of my moments is when I see the essences 
of the new moons arising. 

I was still non-existent as an entity in one of the levels of creation 
when the divine solicitude came forth and made my existence the 
beginning. Having manifested himself to himself, my existence 
was prolonged in my contemplation. I received the supreme rank 


106. See Q. 39:67: “. . . the whole earth is His handful on the Day of Resurrection . . .” 

107. Arabic: ma fl shirbiha. Shirb is “a share, or portion that falls to one’s lot of 
water.” Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 4, p. 1527, s.v. shirb. 

108. Arabic: arja’. See Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 3, p. 1050, s.v. rajan. See 
also Q. 69: 17: “The angels will stand at its borders (arja’ iha) and eight will uphold the 
Throne of their Lord that day, above them.” 


43 


Treatise on Unification 


through the form , 109 and the most secret part of my being became 
his Throne . 110 The divine all-encompassing Name sat itself down 
upon me. His two viziers, He-who-gives and He-who-withholds, 
and his two chamberlains, He-who-confers-harm and He-who-con- 
fers-good, stood at his two stirrups . 111 When the sitting had taken 
place, and the other 112 appeared, and the names “mighty” and “sub- 
lime” were given to me, the courtyard became filled. Subsistence and 
annihilation 113 appeared; just allotment and effusive plenty followed 
one another in alternating course, and expansiveness and contraction 
were firmly established. By the kingdom the king was confirmed, by 
the message the angel became manifest, and by the stars the sphere 
was set in motion. 

Then he called me to instruct me with the language of arbitra- 
tion: “Look into your essence, bringing together all that delights 
you.” When I began to look and could distinguish between those 
that required precedence and those that required contemplation, I 
laid down the different laws and divided the lights between merits 
and graces . 114 I said to those enraptured spirits whom I surveyed: 
“Adhere to the enrapturing presence!” And I said to the subjected 
spirits whom I surveyed: “Adhere to the subjecting stations!” And I 
said to the governing spirits whom I surveyed: “Adhere to the gov- 
erned bodies!” Each of these departed to seek its waystation in order 
to contemplate there the one who had caused them to descend. I had 
already seen the Ringdove, pregnant with the strange Anqa, but in 
dividing up the waystations, I had neglected the one who shares my 
waystation . 115 

109. There is a near homophony between sura (rank) and sura (form). This is 
particularly fitting, as it is the divine form that gives the Intellect its high rank. 

110. A play on words between sarJr (throne) and sarira (secret). 

111. A reference to the Footstool at which level polarities enter creation. 

112. Arabic: al-siwa. What is other than the Real, that is, creation. 

113. Note the near tajriis between fina’ (courtyard) and fana’ (annihilation). 

114. Arabic: al-makasib (what is earned) and al-mawahib (what is bestowed). For 
this distinction and its relation to prophecy, see, for example, Fut. II, beginning of 
Chap. 73. 

115. Arabic: al-munazil. Translation unsure. I follow Gril’s translation ( Arbre , 


44 


Discourse of the Royal Eagle 


I am the knowledge of creation concealed in the cloak of the di- 
vine inviolability. A band of philosophers invented lies 116 about me 
and a gang of noblemen tried to capture me. They set up the fowler’s 
net of their thoughts to hunt me and used against me the very means 
that I myself had provided them with in order to gain from my toil. 
And when their spiritual aspirations were sufficient to grasp me in 
their fowler’s net of thought, there fell into it an eagle with my form 
from the country of illusion. They said, “This is the clear truth!” 
Would that they knew that the truth is not clear to them and never 
will be. Knowledge of me and my existence depends upon what is 
granted as a gift or recompensed for merit. 117 Satan incited them to 
doubt and they imagined that they had alighted at the summit when 
their station was the low plains. They mistook anteriority for eter- 
nity, 118 declaring me eternal and that my existence did not stem from 
non-existence. 119 1 abandoned them to their confusion “like meat on 
the butcher’s block.” Those who commit an injustice to the divine 
command must be oppressed! I am free from what they attribute to 
me, and an unbeliever 120 in what they set up. For God, may his glory 
be magnified, was from all eternity while I was under the decree 
of non-existence. Then he brought me into existence from non- 
existence through a pre-eternal precedence, and my essence became 
manifest. He illuminated my existence with his knowledge and en- 
trusted me with poverty and weakness, turning me away from might 


p. 64). The form is masculine, but from the narrative of the Ringdove, we may assume 
she is the one who has been overlooked. 

116. Arabic: iftard. In the Qur’an, this word is used for the attribution of an 
associate with God. See Q.4:51: “And whoso attributeth a copartner to God hath 
devised an enormous sin.” 

117. Again, a reference to earning and divine bestowal. The Shaykh is suggesting 
here that the philosophers will never discover the truth about the First Intellect; such 
knowledge belongs only to the Messengers, Prophets, and Friends of God. 

118. Note the play on words between qidam (eternity) and qadam (anteriority), 
which have the same orthography. 

119. In other words, the philosophers mistook the First Intellect for the Real. 

120. Arabic: kafir. Gril’s translation ( Arbre , p.65), “I disavow the worship that 
they offer me”, though less literal, conveys the sense of the phrase very well. 


45 


Treatise on Unification 


and glory. I am the humble one who has no glory and the powerful 
one who does not cease to be weak . 121 


Discourse of the Strange Anqa’ 

When the Eagle completed his discourse and finished explaining 
his station, the 'Anqa’ began to speak clearly about her existence and 
spoke strangely 122 about the high rank of her limit . 123 

She said: I am the strange 'Anqa’. My dwelling is forever in the 
west , 124 in the middle station, on the banks of the surrounding sea . 125 
Glory embraces me on two sides without my entity ever becoming 
manifest at all. 

I am the one who has no existent entity, the one who lacks no 
property, 

Strange 'Anqa’, they’ve come to call me. 

Although the door of my existence is sealed 
The Merciful has not made my mention in vain 
But it has to do with a meaning whose secret must be sought - 
It is that I am the one who bestows gnosis to their innermost 
beings. 

Our straight path stretches on, and the wayfarers are each at 
the levels of their light: 

The greatest one is he whose light is sheer detachment. 


121. Ibn 'Arab! plays nicely on the rhyming sounds of these two opposing verbs: 
ya' izz (to be powerful) and ya' jiz (to be weak). 

122. Arabic: tu'ribu (to speak clearly) and tughribu (to say strange things). This 
paronomasia is particularly elegant in that the letters 'ayn and ghayn are distinguished 
only by the dot above the latter. 

123. Arabic: hadd. Could also mean “definition”. 

124. Arabic: maghrib. Note the use of words based on the root GH-R-B-. meaning 
strangeness, west, exile. 

125. Arabic: al-bahr al-muhit. This is also the name for the Mediterranean Sea 
and the Atlantic Ocean. For an esoteric meaning of this “surrounding sea”, see Fut. 
II. 40, where it is equated with knowledge of union and separation. 


46 


Discourse of the Jet-Black Crow 


Limits 126 derive from me, and upon me existence depends. One hears 
mention of me but I am invisible, and the report of me is not one that 
can be declared a he. I am the strange one, the Anqa. My mother is 
the Ringdove and my father the Royal Eagle. My son is the Jet-Black 
Crow. I am the element of light and darkness, the place of trust and 
suspicion. I do not receive the unqualified light, for it is my contrary. 
I am unacquainted with knowledge, for I cannot produce or repro- 
duce . 127 Everyone who praises me is far from understanding me, sub- 
dued by the sultan of imagination. I have no might in which to seek 
protection. The bodily frames of superior and inferior creation trace 
their origin to me. I am the reality that has no character, because of 
the vastness that I have. I clothe every condition with either happi- 
ness or misery. I am capable of bearing any form. I have no rank in 
any known form. But I have received the gift of transmitting the 
sciences although I am no knower, and of bestowing determinations 
although I am no judge. Nothing can be manifested that I am not in, 
but no seeker can attain it as something grasped or perceived in its 
entirety. I am of very great value in the eyes of those who realize the 
truth. I wander through the gathering of those with bowed heads . 128 
Thus I have explained my state and have made manifest what is true 
and what is impossible about myself. 


Discourse of the Jet-Black Crow 

The Crow arose and said: I am the body of lights and the bearer of 
the receptacle of secrets , 129 the receptacle of quality and quantity, 
and the cause of joy and sorrow. I am the leader who is led. Sense and 
sensible are mine and through me appear the traces [of existence] . 


126. As Gril says ( Arbre , p. 67, n. 92): “Limits are what defines a being; they are of 
three kinds: essential, descriptive, and linguistic.” See Fut. II. 63. 

127. See Q. 85: 13: “It is He who produceth, then reproduceth.” 

128. Arabic: majlis al-mutriqm, from the fourth form of the root T-R-Q. This root 
is also associated with the word tariqa , meaning “the Sufi Path”. 

129. See Fut. II. 647. 


47 


Treatise on Unification 


From me arises the world of material bodies. I am the source of 
figures, and likenesses are struck according to the levels of my form. 
I am the lamp 130 and the winds. I am the chain against the pebbles 131 
and the wing. I am the sea whose waves constantly strike one an- 
other. 132 I am, of the numbers, the singular among counted num- 
bers and its pair. My width is the abode of the charismatic gifts of 
his friends and my depth is the abode of abuse to his enemies. My 
height has not ceased to be face to face with his essence, through 
eternity without beginning and end, ever since I was brought into 
existence. I am the alembic of wisdom, the music of melody, and 
the one who brings together the realities of the words. In direct- 
ing oneself toward me, one reaches the limit, 133 and those who are 
endowed with intelligence 134 rely upon me. I am the most precious 
gift 135 that has been bestowed, the final goal that has no end. 136 For 
my sake some are accepted and others rejected. I am those who are 
rolled and held in his right hand, and I am enclosed in the grasp of 
the evident truth. 137 The Real summoned me into his presence and I 
came. lie called me to his knowledge and I readily responded. I am 
the form of the celestial sphere and the place of royalty. Upon me 
he established the Throne and I was given the name “place where it 
was established”. 138 1 am the subsequent 139 who is not overtaken, just 

130. See Q. 24: 35 : “The similitude of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp.” 

131. According to a prophetic report, this was one of the forms in which the revela- 
tion came to the Prophet. 

132. See Q.24:40: “Or as a darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covereth him a 
wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of darkness.” 

133. Arabic: ilayya al-munahhi. MunahhT can also mean “one who forbids or 
warns”. I follow Gril’s translation here, as it seems to make more sense. The Arabic 
root N-H-W/Yhas the meanings: to forbid, restrain, reach (a limit). 

134. See Q. 20: 54 and 20: 128: “Herein verily are signs for men of thought.” 

135. Arabic: luhd. The root of this word generally has to do with entertainment of 
a light sort; however, one of the manuscripts consulted by Gril glosses it as “gift”. 

136. Although matter is the limit of manifestation, the individuals that come to be 
in embodied form are endless. 

137. See Q. 39:67: "... when the whole earth is His handful on the Day of Resur- 
rection, and the heavens are rolled in His right hand.” 

138. See Gril ,Arbre, p.44, nn.29 and 30 for the connection between the equatorial 

48 


Discourse of the Jet-Black Crow 


as the Eagle is the precedent 140 who is not outstripped. He is the first 
and I am the last. His is the non-manifest dimension and mine is the 
manifest one. Existence has been divided between myself and him. 
I manifest his might and his creation, while his judgement depends 
on me. My knowledge flows in him, and his knowledge flows in me. 
When its bestower offers it, it is for our benefit, and when I acquire 
it, he thanks me for increasing it even more. 

Some alleging to be endowed with unshakeable reason made their 
claim and imposed their dubious judgement. They showered me 
with unseemly derision and divested me of the robe of seemly praise. 
But the evil consequences of their actions will turn against them 
and their mocking will encompass them when, in the depths [of my 
hell ] 141 they will call for help and be answered: “Begone therein and 
speak not unto me ”, 142 while in the breadth [of my paradise ] 143 those 
who praised me well will make merry with their spouses “in a garden 
made joyful ”. 144 The Law has already praised me so what do I care? 
The received text has made clear my rank, so why say more? 


line, the place of the Throne’s establishment, and the “dark bodies” that are the most 
secure places to hide the divine lights. 

139. Arabic: al-lahiq. It is interesting to note that both this word and its pair here, 
al-sabiq (see below), were used by the Isma'llls to designate levels in their hierarchical 
structure, be it human - as is the case with lahiq, which signifies the Hidden Imam’s 
deputy during his occultation - or cosmic, as is the case with sabiq , described below. 

140. Arabic: al-sabiq. The Isma'llls, drawing on Neoplatonic emanationist doctrines, 
associated this word with the First Intellect. See Corbin, Cyclical Time, pp.87-9. 
While there is ample proof in Ibn 'Arabl’s writings to refute any Shi ' ite proclivities on 
his part, the linking of these two terms does suggest that there is a stronger connection 
between Intellect and Body than is immediately perceptible. For a refutation of 
Ibn 'Arabl’s supposed Shi'ism, see al-Ghorab, “Muhyiddin Ibn al-'Arabi Amidst 
Religions and Schools of Thought”, pp. 202-6. 

141. Literally: “in my depth”. 

142. Q. 23: 108. 

143. Literally: “in my breadth”. 

144. Q.30:15;43:70. 


49 


Treatise on Unification 


I am, with respect to my Lord, a wisdom for one who sees me, 

For I am the secret whose nature was fashioned without 
fingertips. 

My creator ordered everything within himself when he 
constructed me, 

For I am a rock, and from me the spiritual meanings flash . 145 

Together with the superior beings, [we are] like contesting 
racehorses, 

Yet I am one who conceals himself modestly from view. 

Fm the one who answered my Lord obediently when he 
summoned me. 

lie who, because of time’s vicissitudes, sees my existence 

Like the heart of Moses’ mother, empty of spiritual 
meanings , 146 

Is completely void 147 of the verities of explanation. 

I am the source of habitations and the foundation of songs. 

I am the secret of an Imam, a noble one, high in place, 

Whose knowledge is the most perfect knowledge 

And whose rank is the greatest rank. 

He fell in love with me when he saw me in the enclosures of 
the gardens. 

I do not name him for I fear the spearhead’s 148 sharpness . 149 


145. See Q.2:60; 7: 160. See Commentary, p. 72, for this line’s connection to the 
dedicatee of the treatise. 

146. See Q.28: 10: “And the heart of the mother of Moses became void, and she 
would have betrayed him if We had not fortified her heart, that she might be of the 
believers.” 

147. Arabic: al-khali. See Commentary, p. 101, for a discussion of this term. 

148. Arabic: hadd al-sindn. A pun on the name of the dedicatee, found in the 
following line. The Arabic root H-D-D conveys a number of senses, including: sharp- 
ness, definition, limit, impediment, and legal punishment. 

149. It is possible that Ibn Arabl is also alluding to a tradition of the Prophet: “No 
verse of the Qur’an has come down without it having an exoteric ( zdhir ) interpreta- 
tion, an esoteric ( batin ) interpretation, a limit {hadd) and a place of ascension 
(: muttala ').” If limit - the barzakh between the exoteric and esoteric interpretation - 
belongs to Sinan, the place of ascent where one solves the riddle, belongs to Sakhr, 


50 


Discourse of the Jet-Black Crow 


But he who understands my riddle is Sakhr ibn Sinan - 
The one who possesses the most generous hand 
And the one who is most steadfast in combat. 

Mother, Grandmother, Grandfather, and I: 

The spiritual meanings of our existence derive from God, 
timelessly, 

Like what becomes visible to the eye in the air brightened 
with lightning . 150 

Oh Sakhr ibn Sinan, I have explained to you some of the stations 
of the sources of the creatures: the universal human being, the first 
intellect, the unique soul, prime matter, and universal body. Inves- 
tigate them like an intelligent man who seeks the salvation of his 
soul. 

Peace be upon its author and upon us! 


the rock from which one gains a perspective of the totality. I thank Stephen 
Hirtenstein for his suggestive comments on this puzzling verse. See also Chap. 25 of 
the Futuhat. 

150. This line can also be found in 'Uqlat al-mustawfiz, p. 56, where it begins the 
chapter on the Throne of the All-Merciful, which brings together the “four existing 
things”: Nature, Dust, [Universal] Body, and Sphere. 


51 



Commentary 


T be Title 

The full title of the treatise is long and complex: Cosmic Unification 
m the Presence of the Eye-witnessing through the Assembly of the Human 
Tree and the Four Spiritual Birds ( al-Ittihdd al-kawm ft hadrat al-ish- 
had al-'aym bi-mahdur al-shajara al-insdniyya wa-l-tuyur al-arba'a 
al-ruhdniyya ). As is generally the case with Ibn 'Arabl’s titles, each 
word is carefully chosen for its semantic as well as symbolic reso- 
nance. While we will discuss the “human tree” and the “four spirit- 
ual birds” later, let us briefly look at the other key terms in the title. 


Ittihad 

Ittihad is the verbal noun deriving from the eighth form of the con- 
sonantal root W-H-D, which conveys the basic meaning of “one, 
unity, uniqueness”. The eighth form of the verb primarily gives the 
sense of reflexivity and reciprocity. Thus the first-form verb z vahada, 
meaning “to be one, unique”, becomes in the eighth form ittahada , 
meaning “to unite”, to make oneself and/or others one. As Ibn 'Arabl 
defines it, “Ittihad is that two essences become one, whether serv- 
ant or Lord”, 1 thus the term suggests a mystical union in which one 
essence is subsumed or annihilated in the other. But, as Souad al- 
Haklm has written, “the ittihad in which two essences become one is 
impossible according to Ibn 'Arabl”. 2 As the Shaykh tells us, “There 
can be no ittihad other than with respect to number and nature.” 3 


1. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. 

2. Al-Haklm, Al-Mii jam al-suff , p. 1180. 

3. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. In the case of numbers, one remains the 
essence of every number; two, although it has a different name, is nothing but one 


53 


Commentary 


The doctrine of ittihad is censured by both the exoteric scholars, 
such as the theologians and philosophers, and by the mystics, albeit 
in a qualified sense. Not only can there be no intermingling of es- 
sences, either as an apotheosis of the human being or as an incar- 
nation ( hulul ) of the divine in human form, but the entire notion 
of ittihad rests on the false assumption that there is anything at all 
other than the One Essence. * * 4 Ittihad thus, from one point of view, is 
a meaningless concept. 

This, however, is not the full story, for there are situations 
in which, Ibn 'Arabl claims, the declaration of ittihad is not only 
permissible but necessary for the mystic to profess. In the highly 
allusive Chapter 399 of the Futuhdt , Ibn 'Arab! discusses ittihad at 
length. The paradoxes of this notion are evident in the chapter’s 
title: On Knowledge of the Mutual Waystation of “He who enters 
it, I smote his neck [that is, behead him] , and no one remains who 
does not enter it.” It is inevitable, in other words, that the creature 
will profess ittihad , whether he realizes the true situation or is com- 
pletely unaware. Everyone and everything attributes his own action 
to himself, everything says “I”. God Himself ascribes action to Elis 
creatures, as Ibn 'Arab! points out in a series of quotations from the 
Qur’an. Hence, although the gnostic knows that God is the only 
agent, there are times when his spiritual state or even a command 
from God allows him to attribute God’s action to himself, as in 
the case of spiritual annihilation {fand ’) where God, as a result of 
the servant’s drawing near to Elim through the supererogatory acts 
of worship (; nawdfii 1), “becomes”, in the hadith qudsl , 5 the servant’s 

plus one. The name “one” has disappeared. In the case of nature, various names des- 

ignate the many forms of existing things, but the essence remains one, hidden. 

4. See also Fut. IV. 71, Chap. 456, and Gril’s translation ( Arbre , p. 19) concerning 
the identity of the Voice that addressed Moses from the Burning Bush (here simply 
the Tree). The upshot is that the Real is both the Speaker in the form of the Tree and 
the Hearer in the form of Moses, without the Tree ceasing to be a tree or Moses ceas- 
ing to be Moses. There is no hulul (dissolving of essences) because, as we have seen 
above, a thing cannot unite with its own essence. 

5. A hadith qudsl is the extra-Qur’anic speech of God, transmitted on the authority 
of the Prophet Muhammad. 


54 


The Title 


hearing, seeing, speaking, and all his faculties. 6 When the servant 
enters the station of ittihad , God “smote [s] his neck”; that is, He 
severs the connection between the absolute and the relative with re- 
spect to the servant’s perception of his ontological condition, and 
only Oneness ( ahadiyya ) remains, a Oneness that belongs to the Real 
alone, never to the servant. 7 This, of course, is the reason for the 
“blasphemous” and unruly utterances of such well-known Sufis as 
al-Hallaj, who said: “I am the Real”, and Abu Yazld al-Bistaml, who 
said: “Glory be to me.” 

Another instance of the permissibility of declaring ittihad is dis- 
cussed briefly by Ibn 'Arab! in the Futuhaf s Chapter on Love, 8 with 
reference to the hadith qudsi mentioned above, as well as the Qur’anic 
dictum to the Prophet: “You did not throw when you threw but God 
threw” (Q. 8: 17). Further on in the chapter, 1 ’ he describes the goal of 
spiritual love as ittihad, in which the essence of the Beloved becomes 
the essence of the lover, a statement that would seem to contradict 
his statements elsewhere. Fie relates this to the infamous heresy of 
incarnation (/ huliil ), but says that those who proclaim it are unaware 
of the real meaning of this unification. 

6. See Ibn 'Arabl’s Mishkdt al-anwdr, trans. Hirtenstein and Notcutt as Divine 
Sayings, hadith 91, p. 88 (English), p. 51 (Arabic) for the complete text. Note that, for 
Ibn 'Arabl, only the human being, fashioned upon the divine Form, can participate 
in God’s creativity by engaging in supererogatory acts of worship; angels, on the 
other hand, have a certain one-dimensionality in that they can only engage in what is 
obligatory. See Fut. IV. 30, Chap. 421 (trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 328): “The angels are 
servants by compulsion, while we are servants by compulsion through our obligatory 
works and by free choice through our supererogatory works.” 

7. See Fut. II. 31, Chap. 73: “If it were not for the dependence of the essence of the 
servant, the authority of these two Names [the First and the Last] would not become 
manifest, since the essence (' ayn ) [with respect to God] is one and it is not united 
( [muttahida ), while with respect to the servant it is united, not one. Oneness ( ahadiyya ) 
belongs to God while unification {ittihad), not Oneness, belongs to the servant. For 
the servant cannot be conceived as other than [dependent] on someone else, not on 
himself, so he has no whiff of Oneness ever. One can conceive Oneness of the Real 
and one can conceive relation {iddfa) of Hint, because everything belongs to Him, or 
rather He is the essence {'ayn) of all.” 

8. Fut. II. 322, Chap. 178. 

9. See Fut. II. 334. 


55 


Commentary 


The sense of unification between the lover and the Beloved is later 
explained in terms of natural love, in which two lovers exchange 
breath, that is, spirits, and saliva in intimate embrace. “When this 
breath becomes the spirit in the one toward which it is transferred 
and the breath of the other becomes the spirit of the first, it is inter- 
preted as unification ( ittihad ) ... So it is correct to say [as the poet 
al-IIallaj has said]: 

I am the One I love, and the One I love is me !” 10 

A final example, taken from this same chapter on love, shows the 
bewilderment of the lover who does not understand the situation as 
it really is. Taken from an enumeration of various essential charac- 
teristics of the lover, the passage in question has to do with the lover 
whose essential characteristic is that he is “annoyed ( mutabarrim ) 
by the company of what comes between him and meeting his Be- 
loved .” 11 As Ibn 'Arabl explains, nothing comes between the gnostic 
and meeting God but non-existence, which is nothing. Existence 
is nothing other than God. God Elimself is the Contemplator in 
every eye that sees Him. The only veil between lover and Beloved is 
creation, and the lover is unable to remove creation for it is his very 
essence. As Ibn 'Arab! explains, “A thing cannot remove itself from 
itself, and his self is what comes between him and meeting his 
Beloved ... so he remains ever annoyed .” 12 He imagines that when 
he is separated from his body, he will be separated from composition 
and he will become something simple in which there is no duality. He 
multiplies his own oneness ( ahadiyya ) with the Oneness of the Real, 
and this constitutes the meeting. But multiplication results only in 
him, not in Him. And this makes the lover even more annoyed. On 
the other hand, the lover who is a knower of God does not become 


10. Fut. II. 334, Chap. 178. See also Fut. II. 390 where Ibn 'Arabl makes an explicit 
connection between this line of al-Hallaj’s poem and two lines front the Shaykh’s 
own Risalat al-ittihad. See our translation, p. 24, n. 10 and p. 30, n. 24. 

11. Fut. II. 351, Chap. 178. 

12. Ibid. 


56 


The Title 


annoyed because “he knows the affair as it really is, as we have 
mentioned in the Treatise on Unification (Risdlat al-itti had ).” 13 

And how is the affair as it really is? In one sense, one can explain it 
only by paradox: there is / is not unification, depending on one’s par- 
ticular understanding of the word. Ibn 'Arabl himself explains it in 
terms of the Prophet’s supererogatory supplication that God make 
him into a light since God has said: “God is the light of the heavens 
and the earth” (Q. 24:35). The Shaykh explains: “The glories [of 
God’s Face] are lights, and light is not burned away by light. Rather, 
it is included within it, that is, it coheres with it because it is of the 
same genus. This is conjunction and unification ( ittihad ).” 14 The 
Muhammadan light is thus consubstantial with the Divine Light. 
The servant, who, in himself, has only possible existence, is by his 
very nature something added ( nafl ), “light upon light” (Q.24:34) 
as it were: “You are fundamentally extra with respect to existence, 
since God was when you were not, and then you were.” 15 

Thus ittihad can only occur when the servant realizes his super- 
fluous or supererogatory nature vis-a-vis the Real. By engaging in 
the supererogatory, an act that engages his will and creativity, he 
assumes the attributes of the Real, whereby the Real becomes his 
hearing, seeing, and all his faculties. It is only in this way that the 
Real becomes manifest in the form of the servant and the servant 
becomes manifest in the form of the Real. Then there is an interpen- 
etration of attributes rather than the disappearance of one essence 
into another. 16 

It is, as Ibn 'Arabl remarks in his chapter on Abraham in the 
Fusus al-hikam , like the dying of a garment, where colour penetrates 
the cloth. 17 This interpenetration of attributes is known as khulla, 
or intimate friendship, from which the designation of Abraham as 


13. Ibid. This appears to be the only explicit mention of the R. al-ittihad in the 
Futuhdt. 

14. Fut. II. 184, Chap. 101. See alsofW. II. 126. 

15. Fut. IV. 449, Chap. 560. 

16. K. al-masd’il , pp. 164-5 ( mas’ala 41). 

17. Fusils, pp. 80-1; Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, pp. 91-2. 


57 


Commentary 


al-Khalil derives. As the Shaykh explains, “ Khulla can only be be- 
tween God and His servant. It is the station of unification ( ittihad ).” 18 
It is a reciprocal intimacy, then, in which the loving servant plays 
both an active and a passive part, following the two-part structure 
of the aforementioned hadlth qudsT.' 9 In the first stage: “My servant 
does not approach me by something I love more than by those acts 
which I have prescribed.” In this first movement, one involving the 
performance of obligatory acts, Abraham “penetrates and encom- 
passes” 20 the Divine Attributes. This is followed by a second stage 
in which: “He does not cease approaching Me with supererogatory 
acts until I love him.” This love consists of the “penetration” by the 
Divine Spirit, which courses through every organ and limb of the 
servant’s body: “And when I love him, I am his ear with which he 
hears, his eye with which he sees, his hand with which he grasps.” 21 

Ittihad, then, is the state in which God is “nearer” to His serv- 
ant “than the jugular vein” (Q. 50: 16), but neither Lord nor vassal 
disappears. As Ibn 'Arabl concludes, in the chapter on Abraham in 
the Ft mis: 

We are His as has been shown, 

As also we belong to ourselves. 

... I have two aspects, He and I, 

But He is not I in my I. 

In me is His place of manifestation, 

And we are for Llim as vessels. 22 

18. Fut. II. 22, Chap. 73. 

19. See above, pp. 56-7. 

20. Fusils, p. 80. 

21. In Fut. IV. 24, Chap. 417, Ibn 'Arabl notes that: “obligatory acts ( fara’id ) are 
higher and more loved by God than supererogatory ones ( nawafil ). ... God the Most 
High said : ‘ [My servant] does not draw near to Me by anything I love more than by 
that which I have prescribed for him.’” He then quotes the rest of the hadlth qudsT, 
and remarks: “This is the result of supererogatory acts, so what do you think about 
the result of obligatory acts by which the servant will be God’s hearing and sight?!” 
See also Fut. II. 173, IV. 30, 449-50. 

22. Trans. Austin (slightly modified), Bezels of Wisdom, p. 95. 


58 


The Title 


Kawm 

Kawnl is an adjective derived from the verbal noun kavrn, cosmos, 
creation. It can also refer to the individual creature. The consonan- 
tal root is K-W-N, whose meanings include “to be”, “to create”, “to 
bring into existence”. God’s command “Be!” ( kun ) 23 is the occasion 
for all existence. Ibn 'Arabl finds an esoteric meaning within the 
structure of this command. Although it is written with only two let- 
ters, the keif and the min, the wdw lies hidden within, appearing only 
as the short-vowel damma , pronounced “u”. The seeming polarity 
of the Real and creation is bridged by a third thing, the linking let- 
ter wdw, which represents the Perfect Human Being . 24 This Perfect 
Pluman Being thus serves as an isthmus, or barzakh, partaking of 
both sides of creation as a whole, the divine and the cosmic , 25 yet 
preserving the tension inherent in them . 26 


Ishhad 

Ishhdd is the fourth-form verbal noun of the verb ashhada. Its root 
SH-H-D has to do with seeing, witnessing. One of the senses of 
fourth-form verbs is causative, hence in this case “to make see or 
witness”. For Ibn 'Arabi, seeing possesses an inner as well as out- 
ward sense. The Essence or Being of the Real can never be grasped 
but Ilis manifestation in the cosmos can be witnessed in its infinite 
self-disclosures . 27 In the state of annihilation of self {Jana) and the 

23. Q.2: 117, 3:47, 16:40, 19:35, 36:82,40:68. 

24. See, for example, Fut. III. 283. 

25. ‘“Engendered existence’ translates al-kavm. It may be that Ibn al-'Arabl means 
by this term ‘all that is,’ including both God and the cosmos. Then, when we ‘leave 
aside’ the totality, we observe the two sides. However, although the word kavm can 
apply to the wujiid [being/finding] of God in some contexts, al-kawn is typically a 
technical term meaning everything other than God, everything that has come to be 
as the result of the divine command kun.” Chittick, SDG, p. 407, n. 29. 

26. For extensive discussion of the Perfect Human Being in Ibn 'Arabl’s thought, 
see Izutsu, Sufism atid Taoism , pp. 218-83 ; Takeshita, Theory of the Perfect Man. 

27. “God is present and finds Himself in all things, and man witnesses this 


59 


Commentary 

subsistence of God ( baqa ’), the gnostic realizes that it is God who is 
both Witness and witnesser. 


Aym 

AynT is an adjective related to the consonantal root '-Y-N. r Ayn is the 
paradigmatic homonym, with a wide range of meanings as diverse as 
“eye”, “spring”, “source”, “essence”, “entity”, and “self”. Ibn 'Arabl 
fully exploits the range of possibilities of this word’s meaning in his 
title and throughout the treatise. What the author is being made to 
witness with the eye of his inner vision is the Root of his existence 
and his very self. The title could easily be read: Cosmic Unification in 
the Presence of the I-witnessing. 

k k k 

There is an unmistakable affinity between the paired terms al- 
ittihdd al-kawnl and al-ishhdd al-aymP While the first term may 
suggest to some the notion that has mistakenly been ascribed to Ibn 
'Arab! through the centuries, wahdat al-wujud, oneness or unity of 
being, the form of the word ittihdd is much more in line with Ibn 
'Arabl’s manner of thinking. The fact that the word is in a form 
that implies reflexivity and reciprocity provides a dynamism that we 
do not find in the more static word wahda. Since we know from the 
Shaykh’s own words that two incommensurable essences - the Real 
and the servant - cannot enter into a true unity, and that in reality 
there is only one absolute unqualified Being, the effort is directed to 
the realization of what it means to be the locus where absolute and 
relative being meet. 


presence and finding to the extent of his capacity.” Chittick, SPK, p.226. 

28. See Gril, Arbre, p.8. Gril notes that the alternating symmetry in the title’s 
words ( ittihad/ishhad and kawm/'aym ) is echoed in the introductory poems, which 
depict the bi-polarity of Man. Hence, he says, the treatise comprises two parts, one 
devoted to the supreme realization of the Perfect Man, the other to his universality 
as symbolized by the Tree and the four Birds. 


6o 


The Proemial Poems 


The Proemial Poems 

The Ittihad al-kawnl begins abruptly with a series of proemial poems 
- a Stemning, in Kierkegaardian terms - that sets the tone for the 
first part of the risdla. The series consists of three poems of differ- 
ing lengths and metres, interspersed by prose remarks, including the 
dedication and naming of the treatise. In reality, the three poems 
form a single poem, regularly repeating the refrain: “From my ... to 
my ...” They are all marked by end rhymes to which the letter ya 
(transliterated “z ”) or the shortened variant “i” is appended. The first 
poem’s end rhyme is in 1dm plus the additional “I” -all (for example, 
i'tiddli // jaldll)-, the second’s is dad plus “I” -ardv. {fardi II 'ardi)\ the 
third’s is sin , hence -si: (hiss! II labsT). The result is fifty lines ofverse, 
all ending with the long “ee” sound. In Arabic, the long consonantal 
“yd”\ which gives the sound of a long “ee”, is the marker of the first 
person possessive pronoun suffix. Thus the author truly does not 
cease to speak about himself throughout the entire initial sequence 
and beyond. Imagine the effect if we were to read an English poem 
of equivalent length, all ending in the word “me”. 

The first poem, in the metre baslt, is nineteen lines in length, 
thirteen of which present paired terms in each hemistich for a total 
of twenty-six paired terms. Nine lines consist of dyads that are not 
repeated: incompleteness / completeness; inclination / equilibrium. 
Represented by letters, the pattern would be: A — » B — » C — » D. 
This pattern is repeated for nine lines, after which come four lines 
in which the second of the dyads is repeated, while the fourth is new: 
breeze, boughs / boughs, shade. The pattern here is A — » B = B — » C. 
Following the thirteen lines of paired terms are six lines with no 
paired terms. 

The first thirteen lines are full of dyadic fluctuations, oppositions, 
ascents, and descents, in dizzying succession. Some of the terms are 
states, some things. Generally, the movement is along a variety of 
horizontal axes, but at the mention of the moon, a cyclical variant 
of this fluctuation is brought into consideration. This is made even 


61 


Commentary 


more apparent as the author begins to repeat the last term of the line 
as the first term of the next line: breeze to boughs, boughs to shade, 
and so forth. 

The reader is caught in the sheer instability of human - nay all - 
nature, and the words of the Prophetic tradition may come to mind: 
“The heart is between two of the fingers of the All-Merciful; Pie 
makes it fluctuate as Pie desires .” 29 

The second poem consists of only two lines in the rare metre 
mudari'. The pairs here: heaven, earth; exemplary practice, religious 
duty // pact, perjury; length, breadth, are contraries. There are no 
repeated terms among the eight, hence we return to the first pattern 
of the first sequence: A — » B —> C — » D. 

The third poem consists of twenty-nine lines in the metre hazaj. 
The first pair of each hemistich, with one exception, is presented in 
reverse order in the second: sense, intellect / intellect, sense. Thus 
the pattern here is A — > B = B <— A. A line of explanation or elabo- 
ration follows each of these pair-embedded lines. As we have men- 
tioned, all but one of the pairs in the first hemistich are repeated in 
reverse order in the second. The exception is the eleventh line: body, 
vastness; vastness / prison . 30 This gives a total of eleven pairs made 
up of five individual terms plus the extra “prison”. A final contrasting 
pair, shout / whisper, is given in the last line. 

We have mentioned the pattern of the three proemial poems for 
a reason. The movement of the first sequence is along a horizontal 
line: AB CD — The second can be seen as a Z: 


A B 

► 



29. For variants of this hadith, see Muslim, Qadar 17; Tirmidhi, Qadar 7, Da'awat 
89; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima 13; Ahmad II, 168, 173; VI, 182, 251, 302, 315. 

30. Avariant gives: vastness/narrowness; narrowness/the Footstool. 


62 


The Dedicatee 


The two-lined third sequence returns to ABCD— > and the fourth 
forms a perfectly self-contained X: 


A B 



We also note that the terms in each line have been reduced in 
sequences one, two, and four from four terms to three and then 
to two. The wild ricocheting has settled down to an even swing as 
equilibrium approaches. The poet seems to have progressed from 
the sensation of being caught in the dualities at every level of exist- 
ence to a realization of the Unity at the core. 


T be Dedicatee 

As we have already noted, Ibn 'Arabl states often in the treatise that 
he addresses only himself. What, then, is his relation to the dedica- 
tee of the work? The Ittihdd al-kaivm is dedicated to a mysterious 
personage who, as Ibn 'Arab! says, “understands my riddle”. In the 
Ittihdd he is called by the name Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr ibn Sinan, but 
as Gril has pointed out , 31 there is no doubt that he is the semi-legen- 
dary prophet Khalid ibn Sinan b. Ayth (or al-Ghayth ) 32 al-'Abs !, 33 


31. Gril, Arbre, p.22. 

32. See 'AflfT, Fusils, p. 317. 

33. According to al-Jahiz, he belonged to the BanuMakhzum of the Banti Qutay'ah 
b. 'Abs. ( K . al-hayawdn, Vol. IV, p.476). While some accounts place his tribe of the 
Ta’y in central Arabia - Gril points out that this is also the tribe from which Ibn 
'Arabl himself is descended {Arbre, p.22, n. 11) - other accounts, such as Jaml’s Naqd 
al-nusus, place him in Aden (see Chittick, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the Fusils”, 
p. 87). Gril also remarks that Sakhr was the name of one of the factions of that tribe. 


63 


Commentary 


to whom Ibn 'Arab! devotes his penultimate chapter in the Fusils 
al-hikam. In the Ittihad, however, he is not called Khalid but Sakhr. 
Nonetheless, the two men are one and the same, as will become clear 
later when we deconstruct these names. 

The dedicatee’s role in the narrative seems minor at best, appear- 
ing only once in the Jet-Black Crow’s poem at the end, but this in- 
significance is only apparent. In reality, he holds a major key to the 
work, as a possible alter ego of the author himself and as a symbol 
for the Perfect Human Being as a barzakh, or isthmus, whose nature 
will be discussed below. Some delving into Khalid’s history and the 
various components of his name yields important clues. 

Khalid, whom some, including Ibn 'Arabl, regard as a pre-Islamic 
Arabian prophet , 34 is said to have lived at the time of what is known 
as the fatra 35 - the intermediate period between specific legislative 
revelations, in this case between Jesus and Muhammad . 36 He is 
considered to be a hanif a natural monotheist or Muslim avant le 
lettre, in part because of a Prophetic tradition that links him with 
the message of taw hid - the declaration of God’s Oneness. Accord- 
ing to this tradition, when the Prophet recited the Sura of Sincerity, 
Surat al-Ikhlas: “Say: He, Allah, is One, Allah the Eternal Refuge 
( al-Samad )”, Khalid’s daughter informed him that she had heard her 
father recite the very same verse. 

Khalid is not mentioned by name in the Qur’an , 37 and his status as 
a prophet is sometimes cast into doubt by the Prophet’s having said, 
“I am the nearest of men to Jesus son of Mary, for there is no prophet 
between him and me.” But as Sadr al-Dln Qunawl says in the Fukuk, 


34. Other Arab prophets such as Hud, Salih, and Shu'ayb, were also sent to the 
peoples of the Arabian peninsula, but they did not bring with them a divine law for 
their community. 

35. The word “fatra" is also applied to a condition of stagnation in an individual. 
It is that time known to prophets and saints - indeed to artists and scholars as well - 
when the fire of inspiration cools and the well runs dry. 

36. Some accounts place hint before Jesus. See 'Afifl, Fusils, p. 317. 

37. Note that the chapter devoted to Khalid in the Fusils is the only one in which 
no Qur’anic verses or hadith are cited. 


64 


The Dedicatee 


this was due to the fact that Khalid “did not manifest prophecy on 
the sensory plane ”. 38 

Why Khalid failed to manifest his prophecy in this world is as- 
sociated with a strange story, several versions of which are recounted 
by the Shaykh and his followers. We will mention first the more 
extensive account given in Jaml’s commentary on Ibn 'Arabl’s own 
chapter headings of the Fusils . 39 The story goes as follows. Khalid 
lived with his people in Aden . 40 One day, a great fire (traditionally 
called “ ndr al-harratayn ”), 41 accompanied by billows of smoke and 
a deafening noise, came out of a cave and wreaked havoc upon the 
people, their farms, and their livestock, causing them to flee to 
Khalid for refuge. Khalid approached the fire and beat it with his 
staff until it retreated back into the cave. He told his sons that he 
was going to follow the fire into the cave and extinguish it com- 
pletely. He then instructed them to call him after three days, and 
warned them that if they called him before that, he would come out 
but that they - presumably the sons as well as their father - would 
die. The sons waited two days before their patience wore out - or as 
JamI says, Satan made them restless - and they began to suspect that 
their father had died. So they called him before the appointed time. 
Khalid emerged from the cave, his head wounded by their call. He 
told them, “You have caused me to perish, and you have let my words 
and instructions perish.” 

He then told them that he was going to die and ordered them to 
bury him and watch over his grave for forty days. At that time a flock 
of sheep would come to them, led by a bob-tailed donkey. When the 
donkey stopped in front of his grave, they were to disinter him. He 
would then tell them about the states of the barzakh, the isthmus 
between life and death. 

The people waited forty days, as instructed, and the flock, led by 
the bob-tailed donkey, came by, just as Khalid predicted. When it 

38. Fukuk, p. 307. 

39. Chittick, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the Fusils’’, pp. 86-7. 

40. Some place this incident in the lava fields near Yathrib (= Medina). 

41. 'Aflfl, Fusils, p. 317. 


65 


Commentary 


stopped in front of his grave, the believers among his people wanted 
to open the grave and hear Khalid’s message. His sons, however, 
once more thwarted their father’s plans, fearing the disgrace of being 
called “the sons of him whose grave was opened”. “So it was the 
pagan ignorance of the Arabs that caused his instructions to perish 
and let him perish .” 42 

The sign that confirmed his prophecy - his revelation concerning 
the barzakh - was to become manifest after death but, as Ibn 'Arab! 
says, “He let his sign perish, since he did not manifest it during his 
lifetime, and he let his people perish also, for he did not show it to 
them, so they let him perish .” 43 This is alluded to in another tradi- 
tion linking Khalid to the Prophet, in which the latter is reported 
to have said to one of Khalid’s daughters: “Welcome to the daughter 
of a prophet whose people let him perish !” 44 Ibn 'Arabl, however, 
points out that the blame was to be assigned only to Khalid’s sons. 

A second version, recounted by Ibn 'Arabl in his Muhadarat al- 
abrdr wa-musdmardt al-ahydr . ; a work of belles-lettres, stays close to 
the hadith reports. It traces the report to Ibn 'Abbas, and places the 
story in the steppe lands between Mecca and Medina during the 
fatra. The fire that appeared was called “Buda” by the Bedouin and 
some of them were on the point of worshipping it like the Magians. 
Khalid, presumably because of his monotheism, sought to stamp out 
the root of this heresy. He confronted the fire with his staff, beat- 
ing it until God put it out . 45 The exertion seems to have mortally 
wounded Khalid. The remainder of the story is as above, complete 
with burial instructions and donkey (full-tailed here). Khalid prom- 
ises to tell the people how things are in the world of the dead. The 
rest of the story passes as already recounted, the sons once more 
being assigned the blame for the failure to exhume their father. A 
coda links the story to two sayings of the Prophet, one of which we 

42. Chittick, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the Fusils”, p. 87. 

43. Ibid., p. 87. 

44. See Muhadarat al-abrdr ■wa-musdmardt al-ahydr, p. 105. 

45. In some accounts, he threw himself into the fire. See Pellat, s.v. Khalid b. 
Sinan, Encylopaedia of Islam, revised edition (hereafter El 2). 


66 


The Dedicatee 


have encountered above, that is, the Prophet’s greeting to Khalid’s 
daughter, the other of which reflects the aborted message: “Then 
[the Messenger of God] said, ‘Had they disinterred him, he would 
have told them about me and my community and what would come 
to be from them .’” 46 

We should also mention al-Qashanl’s version that provides the 
intriguing detail that from the fire that terrified Khalid’s people 
emerged an 'anuq - a male 'anqa - whose body partly resembled 
a camel and partly a snake . 47 It was this serpent-like creature that 
Khalid beat back into the cave with his staff, his tribe following 
timorously behind. 

The Fusils, however, reflects yet another version , 48 in which 
Khalid tells his people that he will reveal the secrets of the barzakh 
only after his death and disinterment; he claims that the barzakh is 
in the form of this world , 49 thus confirming what the messengers 
had revealed. As the Ottoman commentator remarks in his com- 
mentary on the Fusils, “It was not that Khalid was manifested with 
the prophecy of barzakhiyya, but that he would first die and would 
witness the states of the barzakh and then, after becoming alive 
again by divine order, he would be manifested with the prophecy 
of barzakhiyya. ,,5i> Hence Khalid’s failure to manifest his prophecy is 
the reason for the Prophet’s statement: “I am the nearest of men to 
Jesus son of Mary, for there is no prophet between him and me.” Ac- 
cording to this commentator, then, Khalid did not become manifest 
with the prophecy of the barzakh, since his pronouncements upon its 
joys and sorrows were not confirmed by his resurrection: “Because 
for the general public, if a prophet dies and comes back, the effect 
of the news he gives of the other world is more definite than the 


46. Muhadarat al-abrar, pp. 104-5. 

47. 'Aflfl, Fusus, p. 317. 

48. The account in the Fusils draws from the story of Hanzalah b. Safwan. See 
Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, p. 191, n. 167. 

49. As Ibn 'Arab! says regarding the disputed nature of the barzakh, its people 
alter in state there just as they do here. See Fut. III. 395. 

50. Ismail Hakki Bursevi’s Translation and Commentary, Vol. 4, p. 1047. 


67 


Commentary 


information of the other world given by a prophet who is not dead 
but who is alive in this world .” 51 

In the Fusils version, Khalid is also attributed with foretelling 
Muhammad’s mission. Khalid’s desire, according to Ibn 'Arabl, was 
that all mankind believe in the message of the prophets and particu- 
larly in Muhammad’s mission as a mercy to the universes, which he 
apparently foresaw. His people, however, did not allow him to fulfil 
his purpose. Thus this version differs in that the message concerning 
the barzakh is delivered, but not confirmed, and the role of harbinger 
of universal mercy is denied him. 

The prophecy of Khalid is in many ways the exact opposite of 
Muhammad’s. While Muhammad’s was fully visible, Khalid’s was 
hidden. While Muhammad’s mission was successful, Khalid’s was a 
failure. While Muhammad ascends to the heavens during his mV raj, 
Khalid is best known for his descents underground - practising a 
sort of katabasis in a cave, pursuing knowledge in the tomb. Like 
a seed deposited in the ground, or an embryo in the dark womb, 
Khalid awaits the time when his people will disinter him, enabling 
him to proclaim his message, confirming the words of the messen- 
gers before him. But Khalid himself could not achieve his wish. His 
message remains in sheer potentiality with respect to this world. 

At this point, a certain constellation of notions discussed at great 
length in the Futiihdt comes to mind. These include the opposing 
states of seclusion (< khalwa ) and society (jalwa ), the various stages of 
annihilation (fandj and perdurance ( baqd ’), 52 and the spiritual voyage 
that ends either in arrival ( wusul ) 53 and halting (waqfa) or arrival and 
return ( rujuj . Considered in relation to these discussions, Khalid’s 
prophecy was imperfect for it was entirely concerned with khalwa and 
waqfa. Lie was not granted the possibility of manifesting his proph- 
ecy in public and was not able to return to his people. Muhammad’s 


51. Ibid., p. 1049. 

52. See Ibn 'Arabl’s treatise al-Fana’ fi al-mushahada-, English trans. Hirtenstein 
and Shamash, JMIAS, IX (1991); French trans. Valsan, Etudes Traditionnelles, 363 and 
364 (1961). See also Fut., Chaps 220, 221, and 286. 

53. From the same root as ittisdl (conjunction). 


68 


The Dedicatee 


prophecy, on the other hand, was perfect for it embraced these 
opposites. The initial stage of his spiritual initiation, before the 
coming of the angel Gabriel, took place in the cave of Hira. Thus 
it was a period of seclusion and flight from the world. In the wake 
of the descent of revelation upon him, however, his apostolic mis- 
sion demanded that he manifest within the world. And his heavenly 
mi' raj did not culminate in any permanent absorption in the divine 
but was followed by a return to his community. As the Shaykh says 
in his Futuhdt, “The perfection of the heritage of the prophets and 
the messengers consists in the return to the creatures .” 54 And Khalid 
is a clear example of a prophet who arrived and halted, unable to 
make the return to the world. 

Secrets of the Name Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr 
[= Khalid] ibn Sinan 55 

The first kunya, or agnomen - Abu al-Fawaris - means “father of 
the knights”. The fawdris were “a class of Arab chivalrous heroes 
distinguished by eloquence ( baydn ) as well as courage and generosity 
( jud )”. 56 The appellation suggests pre-Islamic values and may have a 
connection with the fata, or chivalrous knight, of the Futuhat' s first 
chapter. Ibn 'Arab! makes reference to these values in his dedication 
and again at the end of the Risdla when he praises Sakhr ibn Sinan 
for his generosity and steadfastness in combat . 57 

Gril points out that the word jud (generosity) calls to mind the 
word wujiid (existence) and vice versa; as an Arabic proverb states, 
“Al-wujiid ft al-jud ” (Existence is - or consists - in generosity). 
Baydn (eloquence) brings to mind the Qur’an, since this is one of its 


54. Fut. I. 251, Chap. 45. 

55. 'Abd al-Baql Miftah has provided many of the clues enumerated below 
concerning the name Khalid as well as other interesting information regarding this 
figure in his MafatJh Fusus al-hikam, pp. 135-8. 

56. Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, p. 193, n. 180. 

57. The name Khalid also appears in Ibn 'Arabl’s K. al-'abadila, pp. 168-9, where 
it is linked with the attribute of generosity. See Gril, Arbre, p. 23, n. 15. 

69 


Commentary 


appellations. Hence not only are generosity and eloquence evoked in 
this passage but existence and revelation as well. 58 

The root F-R-S is also connected with the quasi-occult science of 
firasa, or physiognomy. A juris discerns the unseen nature of things, 
and especially human beings, from visible signs. To befaris of some- 
thing, says Ibn Manzur in Lisan al-Arab , is to know it. 

The dedicatee’s second kunya - Ibn Sinan - means “son of a spear- 
head”. This again suggests the notion of pre-Islamic warrior values. 

it it it 

The name Khalid has two main meanings, one concerned with 
rocks ( sak.hr/hajar ) and the other with everlastingness ( samadiyya ). 
But let us begin with the name Khalid itself and the Arabic root 
KH-L-D from which it is derived. 


Khalid-eternal = samad = rock = sakhr 

“ Khalid ” is an active participle, deriving from the verb khalada-. to 
remain or last forever; to be immortal; to remain in a place. In the 
fourth form, akhlada, it has many of the same meanings as form one, 
but it also means: to incline, lean, tend to. In this form it appears 
in the Qur’an: “And had We willed We could have raised him by 
their means, but he inclined toward [or clung to] the earth {akhlada) 
and followed his own whim” (Q. 7:176). Khalida (pi. khawdlid.) are 
rocks or mountains, 59 “the immovable ones, . . . the earth-riveted, un- 
changing, . . . clasping the ground”. 60 Addressed by the poet Labld, 
they are “the mute immovable ones whose speech yields no sense” 
{dumman khaivdlida mayabinu kaldmuhd). 6 ' 

The verbal noun khuld conveys the sense of infinite duration 
and eternity. Ddr al-khuld is an epithet for the hereafter. Jaroslav 


58. Gril,Arbre, p. 22. 

59. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 2, p. 784, s.v. khalid. 

60. Stetkevych, “Toward an Arabic Lexicon”, p. 101. 

61. Ibid., pp. 93, 108. 


70 


The Dedicatee 


Stetkevych has discussed the “binary semantic tension that inheres 
in the word khuld itself”. 62 In the Qur’an, this noun appears both 
in a positive (Q. 2 1 : 15) and negative (Q. 10:52; 32: 14; 41:28) sense; 
and verbs and participles based on this root reflect the same ambiva- 
lence: “Where did khuld begin - in ‘heaven’ or in ‘hell’, or rather: 
in the higher regions of the awareness of self or in the lower ones? 
Is it an origin or an aspiration? ... Is it the future or the past?” 63 
Khuld is also a word for mole, a blind burrowing creature who lives 
underground. Thus both the prophet Khalid and the animal khuld 
are associated with the chthonic realm. Stetkevych remarks that 
even the celestial associations of this root in the Qur’an, wherein 
the term khuld/ khalid is frequently coupled with the term jannah, 
garden/paradise, 64 cannot be divorced from the chthonic: “...jannah 
. . . may itself only be ‘projected’ into the eschatological ‘heavenly’ 
sphere out of its primary chthonic ‘hiddenness,’ ‘buriedness,’ ‘dark- 
ness,’ and also ‘protectedness.’” 65 For the semantic range of the root 
/-N-A/ includes such words as “to veil”, “to conceal”, “fetus” ( janm ), 
“jinn”, and “grave” ( janan ). Ibn 'Arabl’s appellation of Khalid as 
“Jann ibn Jann” (Jann, son of the Jinn) in his dedication is thus 
entirely appropriate. 66 


62. Ibid., p. 101. 

63. Ibid. 

64. For example Q. 20: 76; 25: IS. 

65. Stetkevych, “Toward an Arabic Lexicon”, p. 102. 

66. Gilis ( Livre des Chatons , p.681) has suggested an intriguing connection be- 
tween the other meaning of jann, a great serpent, and Khalid, translating the phrase 
in question as “Serpent son of Jann”. He points out parallels between Moses’ staff, 
which turns into a serpent in his contest with Pharaoh’s magicians and splits the rock 
from which issue twelve streams of water (as mentioned by Ibn 'Arab! in his final 
poem), and Khalid’s staff, with which he beats back the fire into the cave. If this “fire” 
is either a serpent /jinm or an 'anqa ' , as some accounts have it, the Khalid legend 
becomes even more complex. 


71 


Commentary 


Sakhr-rock = hajar = khalid = jabal 

The word “rfr” appears three times in the Qur’an: (1) “Didst 
thou see, when we took refuge in the rock” (Q. 18:63). The con- 
text is the voyage undertaken by Moses and Khidr; (2) “though it 
be in a rock, or in the heavens, or in the earth . . . God will bring 
it forth” (Q. 31: 16). The context is Luqman’s advice to his son; and 
(3) “and Thamud, who hollowed the rocks in the valley” (Q. 89:9). 
Thus rocks may be refuges, hiding places, and ruins of a pre-Islamic 
people who disobeyed their prophet Hud. 

The other word for rock is hajar. This is the word used in the 
Qur’an in connection with Moses: “Strike with thy staff the rock” 
(Q. 2:60; 7: 160), and “for there are stones from which rivers come 
gushing” (Q. 2: 74). Ibn 'Arabl seems to be referring to this image in 
the final poem of the Ittihad, “I am a rock ( sakhr ), and from me the 
spiritual meanings flash.” 

The Moses/rock analogy is evident in another early work of Ibn 
'Arabl’s, Mashdhid al-asrdr. One of the contemplations involves the 
“light of the Rock ( sakhrdj ’ at the end of which the Real addresses 
the Moon: “Tell the rock to let twelve springs pour forth ...” 67 
According to Ibn Sawdakln, who commented on this work, the rock 
is a symbol of the body and its knowledges, the Moon represents the 
knowledge of Nature, the twelve springs are the constellations. 68 


Samad 

“ Samad ” is a curious word that appears only once in the Qur’an, in 
Sura 112. It is variously translated in that context as “eternal refuge”, 
“everlasting”, and “resource”. As such it is an epithet for God. 

The legends of Khalid emphasize Khalid’s role as the support and 
refuge of his people. It is to him that they turn in times of danger or 
need, as in the case of the fire that came out of the cave. We have also 


67. Beneito and Twinch, Contemplation of the Holy Mysteries , p. 74. 

68. Ibid., pp. 75-6. 


72 


The Dedicatee 


seen that in the traditions, Khalid is specifically associated with Sura 
112, which calls God ‘ Ahad ” and “Sam ad Thus, the two elements 
of dependable recourse and strict monotheism are brought together 
as Khalid’s distinguishing features. 

In the Fusils, these suppositions are tacitly understood, for the 
particular wisdom associated with Khalid ibn Sinan is samadiyya . 69 
The chapter on Khalid does not specifically mention what the pre- 
cise connection is between Khalid and samadiyya, although Sadr al- 
Dln Qunawl in his Fukuk interprets samad as “aim”. 70 In the Fusils, 
this is one of the two main foci of the chapter - the other being the 
harzakh - since Khalid is associated with the notions of intention and 
fulfilment. Khalid’s mission, as we have noted, was a failure. Yet Ibn 
'Arabl concludes in the Fusils that God “allowjed] him to achieve 
the reward (ajr) of his wish ( umniyya )”. But he adds: “There is doubt 
and dispute as to whether he attained the reward {ajr) of his quest 
(matlub) f 1 ' In other words, is wishing to perform an action equiva- 
lent to accomplishing the act itself, and does desire merit a reward 
even if it fails to be carried to fruition? 72 “In the outward sense”, 
says Ibn 'Arabi, “they are not equal. Therefore, Khalid b. Sinan 
sought to attain both so he could have the station of bringing 


69. Samad is also mentioned in the Ftisus in connection with the prophet Aaron: 
“He is summoning to a God who is eternally resorted to, universally known, but not 
seen. . . . The eyes cannot see Him, just as they cannot see the spirits that govern their 
shapes and outer forms” ( Fusils ; trans. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p. 248). 

70. Fukuk, p. 307. See also Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 4, p. 1726, s.v. samad, 
for this sense of the word. 

71. Fusils, I. 213. Austin’s English translation ( Bezels of Wisdom, p.268) does not 
preserve the meaning of ajr as “reward”, which is essential to the legal discussion that 
follows. In addition, to translate both umniyya and matliib as “wish” obscures the 
distinction between them. Dagli’s new English translation ( Ringstones of Wisdom, 
p. 276) maintains this distinction; he translates ajr as “reward”, umniyya as “hope” and 
matliib as “sought after thing”. 

72. This is an issue debated vcifqh, of which Ibn 'Arab! himself gives two exam- 
ples: the person who makes the effort to attend the congregational prayer, but misses 
it, and the person of limited means who would like to perform the good deeds that the 
wealthy are able to perform but cannot because of his poverty. In both these cases, the 
reward for intending and accomplishing is said to be the same. 


73 


Commentary 

together both things and thus gain two rewards.” 73 Ilis success, 
however, is inconclusive. 74 

Another word belonging to this root is “ samda ”, which is “a rock 
firmly imbedded in the earth, even with the surface thereof” or 
“somewhat elevated”. 75 Thus we find again associations connecting 
Sakhr / Khalid ibn Sinan with enduring rocks and subterranean 
existence. 

“Samad” also means “solid, not hollow” 76 and is applied to someone 
who takes no nourishment yet neither hungers nor thirsts in war. 77 
Thus it is connected in particular with fasting. Ibn 'Arabl, for ex- 
ample, calls Ramadan “ samadiyya ” . 78 One finds this same connection 
in the Shaykh’s small treatise Hilyat al-abddk “The station is that of 
universal sustenance. It is a very elevated condition characterized by 
intellectual secrets, contemplative unveilings, and spiritual states.” 79 

Finally, the Presence of samad is discussed in the Futuhdt, Chapter 
287. The particular self-disclosure of this Presence has to do with 
the descent of the Qur’an on the Night of Power, which occurs dur- 
ing the fasting month of Ramadan. 80 


73. Fusils, I. 214. Cf. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p. 268. 

74. See Ismail Hakki Bursevi’s Translation and Commentary, Vol. 4, pp. 1049-50, for 
further illumination of this point. His conclusion is: “there is no equality between 
the two deserts of intention and action . . . because had there been equality [Khalid] 
would have been satisfied with desiring.” 

75. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 4, p. 1727, s.v. samda. 

76. Sadr al-Dln Qunawl includes this meaning of “recourse” and “aim” in his 
brief discussion of samad in the Khalid chapter. See Fukuk, p. 307. 

77. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 2, p. 784, s.v. khalid. 

78. See Anqd’ mughrib, trans. Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, p.442; Fut. I, Chap. 71: 
On Fasting. Ibn 'Arab! speaks also of the samaddniyya retreat, most appropriately 
undertaken during the month of Ramadan, in his K. al-khaliva al-mutlaqa, currently 
being edited and translated by Stephen Hirtenstein. This thirty-day retreat consists 
of fasting and nightly vigil. 

79. Hilyat al-abdal-, French trans. Valsan, Parure des abdal, p. 34. 

80. In addition to the sources mentioned above, see also Rauf, Addresses, pp. 52-6. 


74 


The Dedicatee 


Khalid ibn Sinan, Prophet of the Barzakh 

When we bring together all the etymological clues with the leg- 
endary account of Khalid’s mission, we find that this final Arabian 
prophet before the advent of Muhammad is admirably suited to be 
called “Prophet of the barzakh ”. We have already encountered one 
meaning of barzakh in connection with the content of Khalid’s mes- 
sage. It is “the interval between the present life and that which is 
to come, from the period of death to the resurrection ”. 81 But in its 
broadest definition a barzakh is anything that separates two things, 
anything that is neither one thing nor another: it is the dream world 
that partakes of both life and death, the image in the mirror that 
both is and is not the observer; it is the unperceivable instant be- 
tween past and future; the dawn and dusk when it is neither fully 
light nor dark; and the moon as it waxes and wanes in its cycle, for- 
ever in transit from crescent to void . 82 As Chittick has noted, 

A barzakh is something that stands between and separates two 
other things, yet combines the attributes of both. Strictly speak- 
ing, every existent thing is a barzakh, since everything has its own 
niche between two other niches within the ontological hierarchy 
known as the cosmos . 83 

Chittick goes on to say: “Existence itself is a barzakh between Being 
and nothingness .” 84 Between the One, unchanging Being and the 
equally unchanging nothingness ( r adam ) lies the barzakh of the 
ever-fluctuating existent things. 


81. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 1, p. 187, s.v. barzakh. 

82. For an extended study of the barzakh in Ibn 'Arabi’s thought, see Bashier, Ibn 
al-ArabVs Barzakh. 

83. Chittick, SPK, p. 14. 

84. Ibid. This, in Ibn 'Arabi’s terms, is called “non-delimited imagination” ( al - 
khayal al-tnutlaq ), the Supreme Barzakh ( al-barzakh al-a'la) or the Barzakh oiBarzakhs 
( barzakh al-barazikh) . It is also called (although they are not exact synonyms): the 
Cloud, the Breath of the All-Merciful, the Real through whom creation takes place, 
the Universal Reality, Nature, and the Reality of the Perfect Human Being. 


75 


Commentary 


Two contradictories never stand opposite each other without a 
separator through which each is distinguished from the other 
and which prevents the one from being described by the attribute 
of the other. . . . This is the Supreme Barzakh , or the Barzakh of 
Barzakhs. It possesses a face toward Being and a face toward noth- 
ingness. It stands opposite each of these two known things in its 
very essence. It is the third known thing. Within it are all possible 
things. It is infinite, just as each of the other two known things is 
infinite . 85 

When we take this passage into consideration, the initially puz- 
zling reference to Sakhr’s being “master of the dyads and triads” 
becomes a bit clearer . 86 The Perfect Human Being, as we have stated 
above, brings together opposites and provides the resolving bridge 
between them. Thus he is able to reflect in response to the moment 
all the divine attributes on either side of the cosmic divide - mercy 
and severity, beauty and majesty, transcendence and immanence 
- while simultaneously preserving the oddness and singularity in- 
herent in the whole, representing, as he does, the human axis of 
unity. While in himself he is non-existent, as a locus for the infinite 
manifestations of the divine in every instant, he is God’s representa- 
tive {khalifa) in the world. For its part, the triplicate order is evident 
everywhere. There are three levels of existence: Real, creation, and 
barzakh ; three points of articulation for the letters: throat, lips, and 
middle of the mouth; three levels within the human being: reason, 
sense, and barzakh } 1 

Barzakh is the world of the imagination that stands as a mesocosm 
between the spiritual and material worlds. It is the “interworld”, as 
Flenry Corbin calls it , 88 the place where psycho-spiritual events in- 
cluding miracles, spiritual ascents, and theurgical operations take 


85. Fut. III. 46, Chap. 312; trans. Chittick, SPK, p.204. 

86. The dyadic and triadic structure of existence is discussed by Ibn 'Arabl in 
many places. See, for example, Fusils, Chap, on Salih and Chap, on Muhammad. 

87. See Fut. II. 391. 

88. Corbin, Spiritual Body, p. 79. 


76 


The Fourth Foem 


place. “Imagination”, as the Shaykh tells us, “is neither existent nor 
non-existent, neither known nor unknown, neither negated nor af- 
firmed .” 89 It is the broadest of universal planes, since, unlike the 
world of the senses, it contains everything that exists, “real” and 
“imaginary”. It is in this world of image-exemplars that the dialecti- 
cal-monologue between the narrator and the various personae and 
faculties of himself takes place. 


The Fourth Poem 

After explaining the title and offering homage to the Prophet of the 
barzakh, the author turns again to rhyme. The fourth poem con- 
sists of eighteen lines in the metre basit. Although separated from 
the preceding three poems, the fourth poem is connected with its 
predecessors through its end rhyme ta’ coupled with the first person 
singular pronoun suffix ya’-.-dth ( bi-dhatT II iltifatJ). 

In addition, the author continues to group things in pairs, five 
of which are contrasting pairs: secretly/openly; enemies/friends; 
threat/grace; gathering/scattering; knight/maiden. Their effect here 
is more subdued than in the first three poems since they are not 
marked by the repeated refrain: “from ... to ...” (min ... ila . . .). 

In this poem, the author engages in a clever repartee with himself. 
It is replete with paradoxes. Plis very assertion of self ( innam : here I 
am, or indeed I ) 90 would cause his annihilation. To utter “I” throws 
the speaker into a state of fana - annihilation - in which friends and 
enemies, grace and punishment, disappear. There is only One who 
can properly say “I”. 


89. Fut. I. 304, Chap. 6; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 118. 

90. As Ibn 'Arabl defines this emphatic particle in Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73: “If you 
ask: What is inniyyai, we answer: It is the Reality by way of attribution. [The people 
of inniyya ] are those who are engaged with the Tablet, witnessing the Pen, observing 
the Nun, drawing [the ink] from the Ipseity, speaking with anniyya [the personal 
pronoun “I”], expressing themselves with unification ( ittihad ). 


77 


Commentary 


Meetings in the Barzakh 

The author now finds himself in a land “situated on the equator”, that 
is, in a momentary state of equilibrium where opposites are joined 
and realization of the Oneness of Being prevails. It is both a place- 
less place from which he will begin his ascent through the celestial 
spheres in imitation of the Prophet Muhammad, and a balance-point 
within his very nature, anchoring his corporeal and spiritual dimen- 
sions. Thus we find both a cluster of sacred sites connected to this 
place of ascent: Mount Sinai, Mecca, Jerusalem (as the locus from 
which the Prophet was taken on his heavenly journey), and an allu- 
sion to the father of humanity, Adam, “fashioned of water and clay”, 
the synthesis of what is highest and lowest in creation. 

The first stage in the ascent paradoxically involves a “plunge” into 
the sea of hayfila, prime matter, later in the narrative to be symbol- 
ized by the Anqa’ bird. Hayfila is yet another barzakh, the matrix of 
all form, spiritual and material. It is here that the levels of heaven 
and hell are made sensible to the inner vision. The Shaykh insists on 
the reality of these realms as they are depicted in the Qur’an. 

Then he engages in a popular rhetorical device he had made good 
use of in earlier works: “Question and answer” ( su’al wa-jawab) . This 
abstruse exchange between the author and his unnamed interlocutor 
- who alludes to rather than explains his meaning clearly - serves 
to heighten the narrative’s drama . 91 Used with unequaled power by 
the tenth-century Sufi al-Niffarl to describe the ineffable dialogue 
between the servant and God , 92 his Andalusian admirer finds the 
opportunity to engage in riddled speech with the divine aspect of 
his being. In a speech that recalls Job’s Interlocutor from the Whirl- 
wind, this alter ego, who both is and is not the author, both is and 
is not the Real, seems to be seeking to cut the author down to size: 
Where were you when I created the world and the spiritual realities? 

91. For a discussion of this term in Persian poetry, see Schimmel, Two-Colored 
Brocade, p. 44. 

92. See al-Niffari’s Mawdqif and Mukhatabat. 

78 


Meetings in the Barzakh 


The truth demanded by the station demands that the servant realize 
his utter nonentity with respect to the transcendent and all-power- 
ful God. 

Seeking deliverance from the sea of matter, he is transformed into 
a more subtle form, which, despite its station, is still connected to 
the material world and at some remove from the One Reality. At the 
point where he leaves his Buraq - just as the Prophet dismounted 
and tied his steed to a post at the Masjid al-Aqsa - we know that the 
author has begun his upward ascent. In a state of oscillation, like a 
lamp set swinging to celestial music, that brings to mind the poems 
at the beginning of the treatise, he realizes that he is still within the 
world of form, spiritual though it may be. What he longs for is an- 
nihilation in annihilation (al-fana ft al-fana’), and the state of baqa\ 
subsistence, where all of the servant’s faculties are realized to be, in 
truth, God’s . 93 When asked by his interlocutor where he is, whether 
established in this world or in the Essence, he can only answer in 
dualities and then invoke the prophets who are the guardians of 
the seven heavens through which he passes, high to low: Abraham, 
Moses, Aaron, Idris, Joseph, Jesus, and Adam . 94 Despite what he ac- 
quires from the prophets, all of this pertains to the created world, 
not to the Essence itself. It seems that there is no escape on any level 
from his essential creatureliness. 

The conversation that follows seeks to define the relationship 
between the Real and creation ( haqq and khalq). It culminates in 
the realization that, as God says in the aforementioned Prophetic 
tradition: “I am his hearing through which he hears, his eyesight 
through which he sees, his hand through which he holds, and his 

93. For these technical terms, so vital in understanding Ibn 'Arabl’s ideas con- 
cerning the possibility of union between the Real and the servant, see Fut. II, Chaps 
220 and 221 and his short treatise Kitab al-fana’ fi al-mushahada (Arabic, pp. 11-18; 
French trans., see especially pp.40-1 and Valsan’s commentary, especially pp. 27-33; 
English trans. p.6, and Hirtenstein and Shamash’s notes, p. 15, n.ll). 

94. These are the prophets traditionally encountered in the mystical ascent. See 
Fut. II, Chap. 167, Fut. Ill, Chap. 367; Kitab al-isfar-, and Risdlat al-anwar, in which 
the prophets are not mentioned but merely suggested (see Chodkiewicz’s excellent 
commentary concerning this, Seal of the Saints, pp. 147-73). 


79 


Commentary 


foot through which he walks.” The servant now knows the meaning 
of ittihdd as the coincidence of opposites - relative and absolute - in 
one locus, the Perfect Human Being: “Insofar as he manifests the 
Divine Attributes through his positive qualities, Man finds himself 
with God in a relation of similitude, but insofar as being is con- 
cerned, the difference is absolute, for Being {al-wujiid) belongs only 
to God .” 95 

At this point, the Universal Tree and the Four Birds are revealed 
- an echo of the Prophet’s arrival at the Lote Tree of the Limit . 96 
Each of the fantastic creatures, imaginatively conceived represen- 
tations of the Perfect Human Being’s own faculties, addresses him 
both with an elegant speech in saj’ and a poem. 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree 
and the Four Birds 

The Universal Tree ( al-shajara al-kulli) 

If you ask: What is the Tree ?, we answer: [It is] the Perfect Human 
Being who governs the bodily temple ( haykal ) of the Crow . 97 

The first to address the author is the Universal Tree, otherwise 
known as the “human tree”, for it symbolizes the Human Being writ 
large, the archetypal “Perfect Human Being”, exemplified by such 
individuals as the Prophet Muhammad, who reflect the totality of 
the Divine Names and Attributes in a synthetic form. 

The Universal Tree is found in many of the world’s traditions, 
symbol of life eternal. Positioned as the central axis of the cosmos, it 
serves as a pivotal point around which creation revolves . 98 


95. Gvi\,Arbre, p. 11. 

96. Q. 53: 14-16. 

97. Fut. II. 31, Chap. 73. 

80 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 


Significant trees are found in numerous places in the Qur’an, in- 
cluding: the “goodly tree” (Q. 14: 24-5); the “green tree” (Q. 36:80); 
Adam’s Tree of Immortality (Q. 20 : 12); Moses’ Burning Bush 
(Q. 28: 30); the desiccated palm tree that Mary shook to provide her 
with dates (Q. 19: 25); the tree underneath which the believers swore 
allegiance to Muhammad (Q. 48:18); the Lote Tree of the Limit 
(Q. 53:14); the “Blessed Olive Tree” (Q. 24: 35); and, on a far less 
pleasing note, the “Accursed Tree” (Q. 17: 60), the Tree of Zaqqum, 
“a torment for wrongdoers” (see Q. 37:62-8) and “the food of the 
sinner” (see Q. 44: 43-6). Prophetic reports give us the Tuba tree, 
planted by God in the Garden of Paradise with Ilis hand" and the 
tree in which Muhammad and the angel Gabriel nested during one 
of the Prophet’s Night Journeys. 100 

Ibn 'Arabl’s works are also replete with trees. In the Futuhdt , for 
example, all of the prominent trees mentioned in the Qur’an and 
hadith are discussed and interpreted, some at great length. 101 Man 
himself, at one point, is called a tree. 102 

In a work once ascribed to Ibn 'Arabl, entitled Shajarat al-kawn, 
or the Universal Tree, 103 this symbol is extended and described in 
detail. The axial trunk of the cosmic Tree splits into two branches 104 
that represent the multifarious opposing qualities manifesting in all 


98. See Eliade, Sacred and Profane, especially pp. 32-42, for a discussion of the 
symbolism of the central pole or cosmic tree. See also Philpot, Sacred Tree. 

99. See Ibn Hanbal, Musnad III, 71. According to some traditions, the Tuba tree 
is situated at the top of Mount Qaf, is associated in some way with Mount Sinai, and 
is made of green light. Its height is said to reach the sun. See Gloton, LArbre du 
monde, p. 132. 

100. See Put. III. 3; III. 214; III. 554. 

101. See, in particular, his extensive discussion of the Tuba tree in Fut. III. 433, 
Chap. 371. 

102. See Fut. III. 137ff., Chap. 336. 

103. See Jeffery, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Shajarat al-kawn Gloton, LArbre du monde. 
According to Chodkiewicz ( Ocean without Shore, pp. 143-4, n. 13), the recent research 
of Y. A. Mdaghri has shown this work to be by 'Abd al-Salam b. Ahmad b. Ghanini 
al-MaqdisI (d. 1280). 

104. Note that in Fut. III. 315 the boughs of the tree of existence represent the 
Divine Names, and its fruit represents human beings. 


8i 


Commentary 


of creation: male/female; active/passive; Pen/Tablet; and so forth. 
Thus a ternary structure consisting of right-hand branch, left-hand 
branch, and central axis can be imagined. When leaves, symboliz- 
ing the myriad and ever-renewed forms of creation, are generated, 
a fourth element results, and a circle, encompassing this cruciform 
structure, comes into view. Quaternity embraces such notions as the 
four elements: fire, air, water, and earth, and four temperaments: 
hot, cold, dry, and wet - the basic building blocks and qualities of 
the embodied world. In our treatise, in keeping with this quaternity, 
Ibn 'Arab! has placed four birds among the branches, representing 
the four-fold structure of the cosmos. 

In Ibn 'Arabl’s mapping of correspondences, the Universal Tree 
finds its human counterpart in the Qntb, or Spiritual Pole, who 
anchors the coincidentia oppositorum and balances creation. “The 
Pole is the point round which everything turns - hence another 
symbol of the [S] elf ”. 105 Were he to disappear, the cosmos would dis- 
solve into chaos. Mircea Eliade has noted, in his studies of symbols 
of sacred space , 106 that whatever is privileged with centrality - be it 
mountain, city, or tree - provides a threshold between heaven and 
earth. The human representative of this mediation, the Pole, serves 
the same function in Ibn 'Arabl’s writings, and is thus considered a 
barzakhJ, or liminal figure. 

In the Ittihcid , the Tree is described as the Likeness, that is, the 
likeness of the Real, “whose root is firm and whose branches are 
in the heavens ”. 107 The likeness of the Tree / Perfect Eluman Being 
consists of its being modelled “upon the form” of the Divinity, hence 
it has both unity - represented by the well-rooted trunk - and multi- 
plicity, reflected in the appearance of its branches, leaves, and fruits, 
as well as in its very name itself. One of the meanings of the Arabic 
root SH-J-R is “difference in opinion, dispute ”. 108 This is alluded to 


105. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, p. 183. 

106. See Eliade, Sacred and Profane, Chap. 1; Eliade, Images and Symbols, Chap. 1. 

107. Q. 14:24. 

108. See Q. 4:65. Ibn 'Arabfs chapter on Shu'ayb in the Fusils is particularly 
eloquent on this theme. Shu'ayb’s name suggests branching ( tasha'ub ), hence the 


82 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 


in the Futuhdt , where the Shaykh states: “[God] made [man] a tree 
in which there is contentiousness ( tashdjur ), because of his being 
created from contraries .” 109 

[ lie Perfect Human Being is a copy ( nuskha ) of the divine, a syn- 
thesis of all the Divine Names and Attributes, and a heart 110 capable 
of assuming any form . * * 111 Like the Tuba tree, the Universal Tree is 
planted with God’s own hand in the “where”-less place in the centre 
of the cosmos. 


The Universal Tree’s Poem 

The Tree’s poem consists of but five lines, in the metre wdfir. Its 
end rhyme is appropriately hamza, the first pronounced letter of 
the Arabic alphabet. In the majestic sway of the Tree’s recitation, 
the themes of straightness, balance, all-encompassment, and non- 
delimitation by form are reiterated. 

The Ringdove ( al-mutawwaqa al-ivarqa ’) 

The Dove is the Soul that is between Nature and the Intellect . 112 

The dove is the universally recognized symbol of peace and universal 
love. In alchemy, as in Christian iconography, the dove represents 
pneuma, or spirit. 

The Ringdove is more often called hamdma in Arabic literature, 
but her name here is mutawwaqa warqd. What do we make of this less 
common appellation given to her by Ibn 'Arabl? Again we must look 
to etymology. The consonantal root T-W-Q is connected with rings. 


chapter concentrates on the ability of the fluctuating heart of the believer both to 
embrace its Lord in every aspect and to accommodate any form of belief. 

109. Fut. III. 137, Chap. 336. 

110. “The Real can only be embraced by the heart.” Fut. I. 289, Chap. 58; trans. 
Chittick, SPK, p. 112. 

111. See Tarjuman, Poem XI. 

112. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. 

83 


Commentary 


The Ringdove is famous for her fidelity. Because of her dark neck- 
ring (. tawq ), she is faithfully bound forever to her mate . 111 Despite 
her devotion, she is a weak bird and can be easily seized by birds 
of prey, such as the eagle, just as the heart can be seized by love . 114 
Mutawwaqa (ringed) is a passive participle, hence a receptacle of 
action. The Ringdove is something ringed by an agent, in this case 
the Eagle. The ring encircling the dove’s neck is sometimes inter- 
preted by Ibn 'Arabl as the covenant entrusted to her by the Real . 115 

What first comes to mind from the root W-R-Q is “leaves” or 
“paper”, in other words, something that is written upon. Since the 
Ringdove in Ibn 'Arabl’s mystical aviary represents the Tablet (lawh) 
that receives the writing of the Supreme Pen (the Eagle), this is 
appropriate. Ibn 'Arabl himself makes a connection between the 
Ringdove and leaves in Poem IX of his Tarjuman al-ashwaq: “A ring- 
dove flitted past and a twig put forth leaves ( awraqa ).” 116 Warqa also 
means silver, a metal that suggests the shimmering of the moon 
and the reflection of the sun’s superior light. Hamama, on the other 
hand, is associated with the root H-M-M, hence with the colour red 
and with heat . 117 

The Ringdove is a messenger bird. In Ibn 'Arabl’s writings, doves 
are sometimes seen as bearers of inspiration. In Poem XXX of the 
Tarjuman, for instance, doves - here called hamam - bring inspira- 
tion so overwhelming that their song causes the poet to become un- 
conscious . 118 Ibn 'Arabl obligingly interprets doves here as “spirits of 
the intermediate world, the bearers of the inspiration that comes at 
the tinkling sound, which is like the noise of a chain when it strikes a 
rock. They cause this heart to vanish, even as they themselves vanish 
on hearing that sound .” 119 


113. See Ibn Hazm, Tawq al-hamdma. 

114. Schimmel, Two-Colored Brocade, p. 184. 

115. Tarjuman, p. 73. 

116. Tarjuman, pp. 18 (Arabic), 64; Sells, Stations of Desire, p. 67; Giese, Ibn 'Arabl: 
Urwolke und Welt, p. 240. 

117. Stetkevych, “Toward an Arabic Lexicon”, pp. 103-4. 

118. Tarjuman, pp. 33 (Arabic), 112, 116 (commentary). 

84 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 

The Ringdove - when not seen with her loving partner - is more 
often than not found moaning and lamenting her loneliness. Poem 
XIII of the Tarjumdn, in fact, makes reference to a ringdove who 
has lost her child - her unity (7 vahddniyya) as the Shaykh interprets 
it: “the special quality which distinguishes her from all things else 
. . .whereby she knows the unity of Him who brought her into being. 
The loss of it consists in her not knowing what it is and in its not 
being plainly discerned by her .” 120 

Another symbol represented by the ringdove is Jesus, the symbol 
of the universal spirit breathed into the human form . 121 He, in turn, 
breathes life into the dead and the clay birds. 

The Ringdove in philosophical terms is the Universal Soul . 122 It 
is also occasionally called the Spirit ( ruh ) blown into forms, the first 
among existing things to come into existence through being sent 
forth ( inbi'dth ), and the first existent whose existence is the effect of 
a created being, a cause - that is, the First Intellect, which, in turn, 
was brought into existence by the Divine Command . 123 The Univer- 
sal Soul is thus passive in relation to the Intellect, just as the Intellect 
is passive in relation to the Real, and in this way is somewhat akin to 
matter’s reception of form. 

The Soul, while it enjoys a high rank, occupies a subordinate 
level to the Intellect because of its duality, a fact that is reiterated 
throughout the Ringdove’s speech and poem. It has, for example, 
two “causes” or, as they are called in the Ittihdd, “subtle threads” 
( raqd’iq ). 124 One is the “special face” that is turned toward God , 125 

119. Ibid., p. 116. The sound described here is a reference to the sound accom- 
panying the descent of prophecy that the Prophet found most unendurable. 

120. Ibid., p. 73. See also Sells, Stations of Desire, p. 105, and Giese, Ibn Aral’/, p. 253. 

121. See Tarjuman, p. 73, commentary on Poem XIII. 

122. For the Ringdove as Universal Soul in Ibn 'Arabl’s poetry, see Tarjuman, 
p. 64, commentary on Poem IX. 

123. See Fut. II. 427, Chap. 198, section 12. 

124. On raqa’iq and their relation to “faces” see Fut. III. 260, Chap. 357: 

Between these high celestial forms and the low elemental forms extend tenui- 
ties (raqa‘ iq) that belong to the divine names and the lordly realities. These are 

the specific faces belonging to each possible thing that has proceeded from 

85 


Commentary 


which, in philosophical terms, is the efficient cause of the Soul’s 
existence. The other “face” is turned toward the First Intellect, 
which is the secondary cause ( sabab ) or, philosophically speaking, 
the formal cause, of its existence. 

The Soul contains the attributes of both knowledge (' ilm) and 
effectiveness (' amal). m Its effective attribute brings the forms of 
the cosmos into existence: sensory forms - which are bodies and 
their sensible accidents - and supra-sensible forms - which are various 
sciences, knowledges, and desires pertaining to these bodies . 127 Its at- 
tribute of knowledge is called “a father, for it produces an effect, while 
the attribute related to action is a mother, for it is the object of an 
effect ”; 128 that is, it is because the Soul has received all that exists in its 
undifferentiated state that it can generate it in differentiated form. 

Duality also pervades the Soul in terms Ibn 'Arab! describes as 
light and darkness, again sometimes related to the notion of “face”. 
The light face is turned toward the Intellect, from which it receives 
light like the moon from the sun; the dark face is turned toward the 
material world . 129 

In theological terms, the Ringdove is equivalent to the Preserved, 


Him - from the word Be through the divine face-turning ( tawajjuh ) of desire. 
The occasioned thing does not know the specific face belonging to anything 
else, even though he has a specific face in himself, whether or not he knows it. 

From this face everything is poor toward God, not toward its engendered 
occasion {sabab). This is the divine occasion that is nearer than the engendered 
occasion, for the engendered occasion is separate from the creature, but this 
occasion is qualified neither by separation front it nor by a proximate joining, 
even if, in the case of the human being it is nearer than the jugular vein (Q. 50: 16) 

- so its nearness is nearer than that. 

Trans. Chittick, SDG, p. 143. See also Fut. III. 28ff., Chap. 307, where the raqa’iq are 
described as forming a cosmic chain, or ladder, of reciprocal interactions, stemming 
from God to Intellect to Soul and beyond. 

125. See Fut. I. 428. 

126. See Fut. I, Chap. 7. 

127. See Fut. I, Chap. 11. 

128. Fut. I. 140, Chap. 11. 

129. See 'Uqlat al-mustawfiz, p. 56. 


86 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 

or Inscribed Tablet, hence the notion of materiality is continued. The 
Tablet contains everything that the Pen writes upon it in detailed 
form, everything that God wills concerning creation until the Day 
of Resurrection. 130 

The Ringdove is also the equivalent of Eve, who is born from the 
sleeping Adam, “as if the intellect had not become aware of its crea- 
tive power”. 131 It is only when the receptive female element becomes 
manifest that the active male element is able to contemplate most 
perfectly its own ability to know and act in this mirror that both is 
and is not itself. 132 


The Ringdove’s Poem 

Although we might expect the Eagle to address us first because of his 
precedent rank, he does not. Instead it is the Ringdove who regales 
us from her perch on the Tree with nineteen lines of poetry, whose 
end rhyme is -dm (/). This is a fitting end rhyme for a creature whose 
poem both manifestly and subtly alludes to duality and doubling. 
First of all, there are four words in the first three lines, and an ad- 
ditional one in the twelfth, that are based on the consonantal root 
TH-N-Y, whose basic meaning is “two”. Another meaning of this 
root has to do with praise. The word mathnd, and its variant spelling 
mathnah, the plural of which in both instances is mathanin, is replete 
with symbolism, combining notions of repetition and praise. In 
particular we should note that al-mathdm can signify: (1) The Qur’an 
altogether, since it contains repeated mentions of certain dyads, such 
as reward and punishment, mercy and wrath; also that one reads it 
repeatedly without becoming weary. (2) The opening sura of the 
Qur’an, the Fatiha, which is repeated in every ritual prayer and at 
the beginning of the recitation of every Qur’anic verse, or because 
it contains praise of God. The Fatiha is often called, in fact, the 

130. See. Fut. I, Chap. 11. 

131. Gril, Arbre, p. 13. 

132. Ibid., p. 14. This is best explained by the Shaykhinhis chapter on Muhammad 
in the Fusils. 


87 


Commentary 


“seven doubled ones” ( al-sab ' al-mathanf). m (3) Qur’anic verses that 
are repeated often - especially the Fatiha - in order to avert evil. 134 
The Ringdove, as a symbol of the Umm al-Kitab, or heavenly proto- 
type of the Qur’an, inscribed by the Supreme Pen, thus aptly names 
herself as the “doubled one”. 

An additional doubling is fortuitously found in the Ringdove’s 
own name: al-mutawwaqa al-warqa. The first part contains a doubled 
wow and the second a qaf with two dots! 

The Ringdove continues to allude to the notion of duality as she 
remarks: “They call me ‘O second’!” But as she tells us, and as we 
have already intuited by her preceding the Eagle in her address, she 
is not in actuality the second. As Ibn 'Arabl explains elsewhere, the 
four spiritual beings: Intellect, Soul, Prime Matter, and Body, repre- 
sented here by the four birds, in one sense occupy one rank. 

Additional - less obvious - allusions to duality appear in the end 
rhyme of the poem itself: the suffix -an in Arabic is a mark of the 
dual. Furthermore, the Ringdove has a penchant for repeating cer- 
tain roots. Besides the five instances of words derived from TH-N- 
Y, there are two derived from r -N-Y (meaning), three derived from 
its permutation '-Y-N, and two from a closely related root '-W-N. 
There are two derived from '-L-Y (high) along with three from the 
closely related W-L-Y (friend). Then there are two derived from D- 
N-N (earthen jug), along with three from its close relative D-N-W 
(near, low). Finally, there are three from Q-S-JV (far). 

The Ringdove makes repeated references to things high and low, 
near and far. As we have mentioned above, she is connected to the 
Eagle and to her Lord by “subtle threads” (raqa iq) that connect level 
to level in the hierarchy of existence. 


133. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon , Part 1, p. 360, s.v. mathna. 

134. Steingass, Persian English Dictionary, p. 1172. 


88 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 


The Eagle (' uqab ) 

If you ask: What is the Eagle?, we answer: [It is] the Divine Spirit 
which the Real breathed into the bodily temples as if they were 
their moving and quiescent spirits . 135 

Eagles have long been connected with royalty and temporal power. 
The most regal of the birds of prey, they are known for their diz- 
zying ascents and swooping descents, lingering on earth just long 
enough to grasp the unsuspecting field mouse. They have a reputa- 
tion for inaccessibility, living in mountain eyries. Their vision is so 
powerful and acute that they are said to be able to look at the sun 
without blinking. 

In alchemy, the Eagle, especially the double-eagle, is a symbol 
- along with the raven - for Mercurius, the double-natured symbol 
of the philosopher’s stone. The Eagle is “synonymous with phoenix, 
vulture, raven ”. 136 

Why does Ibn 'Arab! call the Eagle ’uqab rather than the more 
common nasr? Etymology may have something to do with it. The 
consonantal root ’-Q-B has a semantic range that includes: heel, 
coming after, following, taking one’s place (as, for example, a vice- 
gerent), punishment, consequence, result of an action, time or state 
of subsequence, recompense, offspring, mountain road, retaliation, 
sinews, and tendons. It is also described in ancient sources as a rock 
or mass of stone protruding in the side of a mountain like a stair or 
series of stairs. From this derives the meaning of ’aqaba as a place 
that is difficult to ascend. The root also has the meaning of a “chief” 
or a “lord”. The Eagle plays the role of a grand old shaykh. He is 
Adam as first vicegerent of God {khalifa). 

The word ’uqab is also associated with the Prophet Muhammad. 
First of all, it was his standard or banner, to which rallied his support- 
ers for battle. Secondly, the Prophet assigned the name “al-'Aqib” to 


135. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. 

136. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, p.202. 

89 


Commentary 

himself because he came after the other prophets and was the last of 
the prophets. 

In philosophical terms, the Eagle is the First Intellect. The 
Prophet is reported to have said: “The first thing that God created 
was the Intellect.” 137 It came into existence from nothing ( mawjud 
al-ibda'T), meaning directly from God without intermediary or 
secondary cause. 

The Essential Attribute connected to the Intellect is Life. 138 The 
Intellect is also compared to Light from which all other lights, that 
is, intellects, are kindled. 139 As such, it is analogous to the primordial 
Muhammadan Light of prophecy, from which all prophets through- 
out time drew their derivative light. 

In theological terms specific to Islam, the Eagle is the Supreme 
Pen. It is created from the Breath, which Ibn 'Arabl in places equates 
with the Cloud. Ibn 'Arabl describes the Intellect as “the bearer 
( hdmil ) of everything that is known, high and low ... which takes 
from God without intermediary”. 140 It receives the dictation of all 
that is to be in summary form and inscribes it on the Tablet, which 
preserves it in detailed form. 


The Eagle’s Poem 

The Eagle recites ten lines in katnil (meaning: “perfect”) metre, 
whose end rhyme is 'ayn. The Eagle’s poem expresses well the Intel- 
lect’s high role in the hierarchy of existence. A subtext of the verse 
is the Qur’anic story of Adam’s creation (Q. 2:30-9) as God’s vice- 
gerent on the earth. When God announced His plans, the angels 
were dismayed: “Wilt Thou place therein one who will do harm 
therein and shed blood?” (Q. 2: 30). Thus the lines: “Approach con- 
fers upon me a pleasing wisdom but it rends the heart of the elevated 
spirit.” What the angels did not know was that Adam was created 

137. According to a similar hadith: “The first thing that God created was the Pen.” 

138. See Put. I. 293. 

139. See Fut. II. 66-7, Chap. 73, Question 39. 

140. Fut. I. 92, Chap. 3. 


90 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 

“upon His form”, as a perfect reflection of his Creator. Moulded 
with two hands, he encompassed more of the Divinity than the 
angels could, as they were created only to praise and obey. As viceger- 
ent, the Intellect/Adam was taught “all the names” - whether these 
are thought of as the Divine Names or the names of everything in 
creation: “The realities hurry toward me to seek their portion”, that 
is, their names. It was because of this all-encompassing knowledge 
that the angels - with the exception of Satan - realized Adam’s supe- 
riority and obeyed God’s command to prostrate themselves before 
Adam. 

The poem plays with the ideas of closeness and distance, approach 
and retreat. As in the story of Adam, it is the Intellect’s disobedience 
and setting itself up as independent arbiter that causes distance from 
the Real, while realizing its servanthood and utter dependence is 
what brings it near. 


The 'Anqa’ 

If you ask: What is the Anqa ’?, we answer: [It is] the Dust ( haha ’), 
which is neither existent nor non-existent, although it assumes 
form in the vision-event . 141 

The Anqa’ is the Dust in which God reveals/opens (fataha ) the 
bodies of the world . 142 

The r anqd\ sometimes translated into English as either gryphon or 
phoenix, is a mythical bird. Early Arabic lexicographers struggled to 
define this creature none had ever seen. It is said to be perhaps a kind 
of eagle ( r uqdb ) or vulture ( rakhama ) or a crested black bird or one 
that is bald and has a long yellow beak . 143 Sometimes those seeking 
an etymological connection describe it as long-necked ('unuq in 


141. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. 

142. Al-Istildhdt, p.310. 

143. Kopf, “The Bird 'Antiq”, p. 125. For other descriptions of the 'anqa’ under its 
various guises as phoenix, gryphon, and so forth, see Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, 
pp. 184-5. 


91 


Commentary 


Arabic means “neck”). The form 'anuq, according to the lexicogra- 
phers, is either male or female, singular or plural, but the form 'anqa 
is feminine. The ' anqa is said to live atop the inaccessible Mount 
Qaf. Sometimes her high mountain habitat itself is called r anqa \ 144 

Many proverbs exist concerning this odd bird, and from the be- 
ginning it was associated with all that was marvellous, occult, and 
strange. “Rarer than the eggs of the 'anuq” 145 was one such proverb, 
and the Turkish ismi var cismiyok - it has a name but not a body - came 
to symbolize “everything that exists only in the imagination ”. 146 

The 'anqa’ has certain similarities to another fanciful female bird, 
the simurgh, described as “the manifestation of spiritual reality ”. 147 
The simurgh is the object of the birds’ quest in 'Attar’s famous par- 
able. The ’anqa’ and the simurgh find a felicitous pairing in the avian 
symbolism of a follower of Ruzbihan Baqll: “These are the places 
of the descent of the Simurgh of the spirit . . . [and] the ascent of the 
'Anqa’ of the heart .” 148 

The phoenix plays a major role in alchemical texts, in which the 
very alchemical process is said to begin in chaos and end in the birth 
of the phoenix, or philosopher’s stone . 149 

In Ibn 'Arabl’s symbology, as we have discovered, etymology pro- 
vides a rich mine to explore. In the case of the “Strange 'Anqa’’” 
{'anqa’ mughrib, or sometimes mugharrib) , the consonantal root 
GH-R-B conveys the following semantic range: distance, removal, 
exile, foreignness, hiddenness, the setting sun, west, strangeness, 
improbability, obscurity, and incomprehensibility. 

It is also connected with the quality of blackness. For instance, it 
is a certain intensely black grape, and intensely black hair . 150 Note 
that both the Anqa’ and her son the Crow ( ghurab ) are connected 


144. Lan e, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 5, p. 2177, s.v. a'naq. 

145. Kopf, “The Bird 'Anuq”, p. 125. 

146. Schimmel, Two-Colored Brocade, p. 188. 

147. Ibid. 

148. See Ernst, “The Symbolism of Birds and Flight”, p. 366. 

149. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, p.202. 

150. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 5, p. 2177, s.v. a'naq. 


92 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 


with this root, the Anqd’ primarily with connotations of hidden- 
ness and strangeness, while the Ghurdb, as we shall see, is primarily 
associated with distance and blackness. It was no doubt quite inten- 
tional, on Ibn 'Arabl’s part, to choose his four birds with an eye 
to the symbolic gradations of light. The Eagle, as we have seen, is 
pure light; the Ringdove, a mixture of light and darkness, with light 
predominating; the Anqd’, an ambiguous twilight, tending toward 
dark; and the Crow, jet-black midnight. 

On the negative side, the term 'anqd’ mughrib is also connected to 
the notion of calamity or misfortune. The expression tdrat bihi 'anqd’ 
mughrib means: calamity or misfortune carried him away . 151 More- 
over, the early animal encyclopaedists did not hesitate to put the 
'anuq in the category of dung-eaters . 152 In a similarly negative vein, 
the 'anqd’ was sometimes associated with the jinn. In a tradition, 
innafi-kum mugharribin means: “Among you are those in whom the 
jinn have a partnership or share” because of their coming from re- 
mote or foreign stock . 153 

Because among its meanings is “west”, it is also associated both 
with the geographical west, that is, the Maghreb, where Ibn 'Arabl 
spent much of his youth, and the spiritual meaning of “west” as 
esoteric knowledge. This contrasts with the Illuminationist school, 
founded by the martyred Suhrawardi, which saw the west as the dark 
realm of the body and the east as the source of spiritual knowledge 
and light. In Ibn 'Arabl’s early work Anqd’ mughrib , the narrator al- 
ludes cryptically to the Seal of the Saints, Jesus, both as the 'anqd’ 
mughrib and as the Sun which, according to Islamic tradition, will 
rise in the west at the end of time. 

There is an obvious parallel between the Phoenix (often the trans- 
lation of choice for 'anqd’) and Khalid, both of whom are connected 
with fire, death, and resurrection . 154 Here is 'Attar on the Phoenix: 

151. Ibid. 

152. Kopf, “The Bird 'Anuq”, p. 129. 

153. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Part 5, p. 2177, s.v. a'naq. 

154. Another reference to the story of Khalid and the fiery 1 Anqa ’ may be found 
in Ibn 'Arabl’s 'Anqa' mughrib. See Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, pp. 481-2. 


93 


Commentary 


The Phoenix is an admirable and lovely bird which lives in 
Hindustan. It has no mate and lives alone. . . . The Phoenix lives 
about a thousand years and he knows exactly the day of his death. 
When his time comes he gathers round him a quantity of palm 
leaves and, distraught among the leaves, utters plaintive cries. . . . 
His lamentations express the sorrow of death, and he trembles like 
a leaf. At the sound of his trumpet the birds and the beasts draw 
near to assist the spectacle. Now they fall into bewilderment, and 
many die because their strength fails them. While the Phoenix 
still has breath, he beats his wings and ruffles his feathers, and by 
this produces fire. The fire spreads to the palm fronds, and soon 
both the fronds and the bird are reduced to living coals and then 
to ashes. But when the last spark has flickered out a new small 
Phoenix arises from the ashes. 155 


In philosophical parlance, the Anqa is a metonym for the Greek 
notion of hyle (Arabic: hayiila), or prime matter, 156 which Ibn 'Arabl, 
citing precedent in the Qur’an, 157 'All ibn Abl Talib, and the Sufi 
Sahl al-Tustarl (d.896), 158 generally prefers to call Dust {haba’). In its 
original meaning, haba’ was the dust particles that dance in the rays 
of the sun. Appropriated by Arabic alchemists such as Jabir, haba’ 
was seen as the constitution of the material world in formation. 159 
Associated with the sheer potentiality 160 and the female principle 


155. 'Attar, Mantiq al-tayr, pp. 66-7. 

156. The Greek philosophers discussed prime matter extensively, basing their 
doctrines on Aristotle’s writings on material cause, Plato’s notions of the receptacle, 
or a combination of the two. It is primarily this hybrid doctrine that penetrated the 
Islamic milieu through the late Hellenistic Neoplatonic commentary tradition. 

157. See Fut. I. 122, Chap. 7. “It was scattered dust” (Q. 56:6). 

158. See Fut. I. 119, Chap. 6. For Sahl, the Muhammadan Light was akin to halm’ 
in that it was shaped by God from His own Light. See Bowering, Mystical Vision of 
Existence, p. 150. 

159. See Kraus, Jabir ibn Hayyan, p. 142 and his long note concerning haba’ on 
p. 154, n.6. 

160. See also Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae la.76.7; Summa contra Gentiles 
I, Chap. 43; II, Chap. 96; III, Chap. 6. 


94 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 

- hence the feminine gender of the Anqd’ in the Ittihdd - prime 
matter is capable of taking on any form and as such is the matrix and 
ground for the universe. 

The notion of prime matter is a particularly difficult one to grasp, 
especially since the term “matter” in modern terms suggests the 
stuff of reality that we can physically sense and grasp. But prime 
matter is nothing of this sort. As the Ikhwan al-Safa’ (Brethren of 
Purity) write, “It is a simple intelligible substance that cannot be 
perceived by sense .” 161 It is completely dimensionless, unquantifiable, 
and devoid of actual content, while containing at the same time the 
potential forms of all existence. As such, even understanding it be- 
comes impossible. One is left only with knowledge of its name and 
the faculty of imagination, which is its domain, to give it form. 

The origin of this Dust, according to Ibn 'Arabl, is God’s desire 
to bring the cosmos into existence and His theophany “in the Uni- 
versal Reality 162 - a reality called Dust ”. 163 The Shaykh compares it 
to the plaster with which a builder moulds whatever forms he wishes. 
God manifests Ilimself as Light to the Dust, and every thing exist- 
ing in potentia in this Dust receives His light according to its par- 
ticular predisposition, “as the corners of a room receive the light of 
a torch, and are more fully and brightly lit up the nearer they are to 
the torch ”. 164 

Habd’, says Ibn 'Arabl, is present in all natural forms, and cannot 
be divided, separated, or decreased. He compares it to the whiteness 
that can be perceived in every white thing . 165 In this it appears to be 
equivalent to the philosophical universal accident that has no reality 
save when it manifests in an underlying subject or substance. An- 
other example, given in the Futuhdt, makes this even clearer. Know- 
ledge, says the Shaykh, in itself is neither eternal nor temporal. In 

161. Rasa’il, II, p. 6. 

162. Universal Reality is synonymous with Reality of Realities {haqiqat al-haqa’ iq). 
For more on the relationship between these terms and the Anqa\ see below, p. 107. 

163. Fut. I. 119, Chap. 6. 

164. Fut. I. 119, Chap. 6; trans. Chodkiewicz, Seal of the Saints, p.68. 

165. Fut. I. 122, Chap. 7. 


95 


Commentary 


the Eternal One, knowledge is eternal; in the creature, knowledge 
is temporally originated. “In every essence it accords with its own 
reality and entity. But it has no existential entity except the entity of 
that which it describes. So it remains in its root: an intelligible thing, 
not an existent thing .” 166 

Hayiila, moreover, is not only associated with cosmology and epis- 
temology but is also used in connection with the Perfect Eluman 
Being. For example, Ibn 'Arab! tells the reader in his Fusils, “Be the 
hayiila of all the doctrinal beliefs ”, 167 meaning: Do not limit yourself 
to any particular Face that God shows to the believers, for they are 
infinite. It is to this all-encompassment that he refers when he says in 
what is perhaps his most memorable lines of verse: “My heart has be- 
come capable of every form: it is a pasture for gazelles and a convent 
for Christian monks, / And a temple for idols and the pilgrim’s Ka'ba 
and the tables of the Tora and the book of the Koran .” 168 

In his Dlivan, the Shaykh composed a poem to the Anqa’, which 
we give here in full as it expresses so well the nature of this strange 
creature: 

I marvel at a being that comprises every form, 

Whether of essential angels, jinn, or humankind; 

Whether of this world or of the world-supernal, 

Of animal, vegetable, or mineral. 

These are naught beside it, 

Nor yet are they its essence, 

But in any form it wills, it manifests itself. 

It is what appears, by definition, to perception, 

Yet it is what remains veiled from conception. 

For minds cannot know it by the force of their thinking, 

But Imagination makes it manifest to sense. 

It is the Fiving, although no life supports its Essence 


166. Fut. II. 432, Chap. 198, Section 14; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 139. 

167. Fusils, I. 113; Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p. 137. 

168. Tarjuman, pp. 19 (Arabic), 67. 


96 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Four Birds 

In the way that all the forms subsist in [life] . 

Inform me then, who it may be that I have indicated 
In what we have described (and cast aside conceptions): 
There it is - concealed, but without being absent; 

And there, again, envisaged, but hidden from vision! 

I would like to know: Of the likes of it have you 
Ever heard or no? - Inform me, then, who is it? 

But no one knows what we have adduced here 
Except for One, and that is God. 

No creature can ever comprehend it. 

None there is like unto it, except one personage: 

I marvel at the One Perfect that he epitomizes ! 169 


The AnqfT’s Poem 

The Anqd” s poem, like that of the Tree , 170 has but five lines, whose 
end rhyme is ddl, primarily —ltd with the exception of the final word 
of the poem that ends in -id. A long “u”, inserted between the final 
two consonants of a first-form verb, indicates the passive participle, 
the recipient of an action, for example mamdud. This participle is 
particularly apt for the Anqd’ who, as a metonym for prime matter, 
receives all forms . 171 


169. Trans. Elmore (slightly altered), Islamic Sainthood, pp. 614-15. He bases his 
trans. on the 1855 edn. of the Dlwdn. 

170. It is not by mere chance that the poems of the ' Anqd ’ and the Tree are equal 
in length. The author wants to draw our attention to the Anqd ” s similarity to the 
Tree as Perfect Human Being. 

171. For more on the Anqd’, see Elmore, Islamic Sainthood, pp. 184-95. 


97 


Commentary 


The Jet-Black Crow ( al-ghurab ) 

If you ask: What is the Crow?, we answer: [It is] the Universal 
Body, which the Eagle made appear by means of the Dove. 172 

The raven or crow is a bird that is often, perhaps because of its col- 
our, connected with the occult. In alchemical lore, the raven - like the 
eagle and the phoenix - is one of the symbols for Mercurius, the lapis 
philosophorium. 1 77 It is thus associated with everything that is solid, 
dark, and earthy. It represents the first stage of the alchemical proc- 
ess, melanosis or nigredo, “either present from the beginning as a qual- 
ity of the material prima, the chaos or massa confusa, or else produced 
by the separation ... of the elements”. 174 Ibn 'Arabl appears to be well 
acquainted with the alchemical art when he has the Ghurdb call him- 
self the alembic (i hiitdqa ), an alchemical term. Jung tells us that the 
alembic’s ideal shape was perfectly round - or sometimes egg-shaped, 
in imitation of the womb and the heavenly bodies. 175 Universal Body, 
the Ghurdb' s metaphysical reality, is also created round: “The first 
shape that this body received was the circular shape.” 176 

Crows inhabit “the hibernal-material world” 177 and are associated 
with death and entombment. The ghurdb is found in the Qur’an in 
this connection in the remarkable story of Cain and Abel. Follow- 
ing Cain’s murder of his brother: “Allah sent a raven scratching up 
the ground, to show him how to hide his brother’s naked corpse. He 
said: Woe unto me! Am I not able to be as this raven and so hide my 
brother’s naked corpse? And he became repentant”(Q. 5: 31). 

In Arabic literature, the crow or raven - the two are not distin- 
guished - generally has a negative connotation for the reasons we 
have alluded to above. 178 In Ruml’s poetry, for example, the crow is 


172. Fut. II. 130, Chap. 73, Question 153. 

173. Jung, Philosophy and Alchemy, p. 134. 

174. Ibid., p. 230. 

175. See ibid., pp. 87, 236. 

176. 'Uqlat al-mustawfiz, p. 57. 

177. Schimmel, Triumphal Sun, p. 118. 

98 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 

consideredanuglyandpredacious bird, aconsumerofcarrionand dung. 
By extension, it is a symbol of those attracted by the material world. 
It also has a reputation for sharp-sightedness, caution, and pride. 

Crows are almost invariably birds of ill-omen. In many a pre- 
Islamic poem, the ghurab al-bayn - archetypal bird of separation 
- signals the impending separation of lover and beloved. Ibn 'Arabl 
employs the motif of the ghurab al-bayn in his poetry upon occa- 
sion. In Poem XV of the Tarjumdn al-ashtvdq, for example, he writes: 
“Gone, gone, / cawed the crows of separation, / God leave rotting on 
the path / a crow that caws! // And what are the crows of separation / 
but camel stallions / pacing hard, / taking those we love away .” 179 

In pre-Islamic Arabia, Ghurab was a personal name which, ac- 
cording to tradition, Muhammad would not allow the Muslims to 
keep because of its etymological association with separation from 
one’s homeland ( ghurba ) and its natural association with the foul 
carrion-eating bird. 

In philosophical terms, the Jet-Black Crow represents Universal 
Body. Universal Body is sometimes known as “Second Matter ”, 180 
the first metaphysical step to concrete existence . 181 It is absolute, 
unqualified body which, because it receives effects from Nature in the 
form of the four elements, is the first natural form . 182 Unlike hayula, 


178. For more on the raven in Arabic literature, see Stetkevych, Muhammad and 
the Golden Bough, p. 117-18, n. 11. 

179. Trans. Sells, Stations of Desire, p. 114. Nicholson gives a more prosaic English 
trans., Tarjumdn, pp.21 (Arabic), 76. 

180. The designation of Universal Body as “second matter” in Arabic philosophy 
can be found in the Rasa’ il of the Ikhwan al-Safa’ (Vol. Ill, p. 187): “The First Hyle 
receives measurements, which are length, width, and depth, and with that it becomes 
the Absolute Body, which is the Second Hyle.” 

181. Philosophical discussions concerning first and second matter began early in 
Greek philosophy, probably in response to Stoic ideas concerning matter, and lasted 
well into the Hellenistic period. See de Haas, John Philoponus ’ New Definition. The 
Arabic philosophers continued the debate, formulating their own opposing notions. 
See Hyman, “Aristotle’s ‘First Matter’ and Avicenna’s and Averroes’ ‘Corporeal Form’”. 

182 . See Ikhwan al-Safa’, Rasa’ il, II, p. 6. See also Nasr, Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, 
pp. 58-9. 


99 


Commentary 


Universal Body is quantifiable and determinate; it has length, width, 
and depth. A “corporeal sphere”, it “fills the Void”, and “within it 
every corporeal thing in the cosmos takes shape ”. 183 

As Ibn 'Arabl says in the ' Uqlat al-mustawfiz : “The first form that 
received the form of the body is length, breadth, and depth. ... Its 
length is from the Intellect, its width from the Soul, and its depth is 
the space that extends to the centre [of the earth] . For this reason, 
these three realities were in it, and it was three-dimensional .” 184 

The Universal Body is given the shape of a circle, the most perfect 
of shapes , 185 and it has movement, not from place to place but around 
its axis, “like a hand-mill ”. 186 This movement is caused by heat, for, 
if the elements of the body were perfectly equilibrated, it would be 
stationary and there would be no manifestation whatsoever. Thus 
the series of revolving celestial spheres are the first and finest of the 
corporeal bodies to come into existence in Universal Body. 

Universal Body is associated with fullness ( mala ’) as contrasted 
to void (i khala ’), and it is in the Shaykh’s chapter on Retreat ( khalwa ) 
in the Futuhat that some of his most intriguing remarks concerning 
Universal Body can be found. The first thing to fill the void, accord- 
ing to Ibn 'Arabl, was the dimensionless Dust, a “dark substance ”. 187 
Then the Real manifested Himself to this substance with His Name 
the Light, dyeing it and removing from it the darkness of non-ex- 
istence. It then was attributed with existence and became what the 
early philosophers called the “Great Man” (al-insan al-kabh •), in 
other words, the macrocosm. The forms of shapes were unfolded 
within this body: shapes of the celestial spheres, the elements, and 
all generated beings, the human - called the “Small Man” - consti- 
tuting the last of them. This human being, created upon the form of 


183. Murata, Tao oflslatn, p. 156. 

184. 'Uqlat al-mustawfiz, pp. 56-7. 

185. As Corbin points out ( Temple and Contemplation , p. 216), the circular form 
should be conceived in terms of function rather than of geometrical shape. 

186. Put. II. 433, Chap. 198, Section 14. 

187. Put. II. 150, Chap. 78. See also Fusils, Chap, on Joseph, for the description of 
the cosmos in its latent form as “shadow” and its relation to the Imagination. 


IOO 


Soliloquies of the Universal Tree and the Fo ur Birds 


the Real and the cosmos, bringing together every attribute, is God’s 
vicegerent, the Perfect Human Being. Thus, as the Shaykh elegantly 
puts it, “the Dusty-Substance impregnated with Light is the basic 
element ( al-basit ), the manifestation of the cosmos in it is the inter- 
mediary ( al-wasit ), and the Perfect LIuman Being is the summary 
(al-wajtz)”. m 

In Chapter 198 of the Futuhat, the Divine Name associated with 
Universal Body is the Manifest ( al-zahir ), because it is the final out- 
come of the divine creative process, the complete filling of the void 
or womb of non-existence with life in all its manifest forms. The pro- 
phetic wisdom exemplified by this Name is that of Abraham, who, 
with his epithet “the Intimate Friend” ( khalil) exhibits the comple- 
mentary qualities of voiding ( khald’) m of self and filling {maid’) with 
God. Permeated with divine qualities, as light permeates inchoate 
matter, Abraham becomes the manifest locus of the hidden God: 
“If . . . the creature is considered the manifest and the Reality the 
Unmanifest within him, then the Reality is in the hearing of the 
creature, as also in his sight, hand, foot, and all his faculties, as de- 
clared in the [well-known] Lloly Tradition of the Prophet.” 190 To 
deprecate the material world is thus to fail to witness the fullness of 
God’s Self-disclosure in the manifold vessels of the cosmos and to 
be ignorant of both oneself and God. “The spirit cannot rationally 
understand itself without the body, which is the locus of ‘how many’ 
and manyness. ... It does not know its humanness without the exist- 
ence of the body along with it.” 191 

An additional connection between Abraham and the Ghurdb should 
be noted. Corbin has pointed out that the site of the Maqam Ibrahim 
(Station of Abraham) is located in the western area of the Ka'ba 
precinct. Lienee, the notions of setting and exile are appropriately 


188. Fut. II. 151, Chap. 78. 

189. Khulla (intimate friendship) and khala’ (void) are not derived from the same 
root, but Ibn 'Arabl often makes use of assonant words to draw startling parallels. 

190. Fusus, p. 81; trans. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p. 92. 

191. Fut. II. 618, Chap. 282; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 235. 

IOI 


Commentary 


attributed to this archetypal monotheist, who refused to worship 
what sets, and chose exile over idol worship. 192 


The Jet-Black Crow’s Poem 

The Jet-Black Crow has twenty lines of verse, whose metre is ramal 
and whose end rhyme is -am, like the Ringdove’s. The world-shun- 
ning philosophers have maligned the Body as the source of darkness 
and evil, but the Crow seeks to set the record straight. As a manifes- 
tation of the Divine Name “the Last”, 193 he is the very crown of crea- 
tion; as a manifestation of the Name “the Manifest” he is the matrix 
for the corporeal entities of the universe. Although dark himself, he 
is the source of the myriad sparks of light in that the stars and plan- 
ets are all derived from Universal Body. His poem thus contains an 
extended allusion to the Light verse of Sura 24. 

Since the cosmos is created upon principles of arithmetic, geom- 
etry, and music, all these principles receive their first determination 
in the Universal Body. For that reason, the Crow rightly calls him- 
self the “foundation of songs”. 

The Jet-Black Crow, because of his darkness, is a keeper of secrets 
and a repository of the Trust. 194 The one who can unravel his secret 
is someone who is also associated with the chthonic realm: Sakhr ibn 
Sinan, prophet of the Barzakh. 


192. Corbin, Temple and Contemplation, p. 231. 

193. Note also the connection between the Name “the Last” ( al-Akhir ) and the 
next or “last” world ( al-akhira ). Many of the secrets of the Crow - archetypal harbin- 
ger of death - have to do with the fate of the body after death. In this he is very like 
the man whose secret he conceals. 

194. See Fut. II. 647. 


102 


Cosmic Marriage and the Genealogy of the Birds 


Cosmic Marriage 195 and 
the Genealogy of the Birds 

According to Ibn 'Arabl, the entire universe is the locus of mar- 
riage and procreation, not only among material beings but in the 
divine and spiritual realms as well. God, for example, engenders the 
universe in nothingness when He brings the fixed entities ( al-a'ydn 
al-thdbita) into existence . 196 

The Pen and the Tablet are also paired as a cosmic couple: 

Between the Pen and the Tablet there is an intelligible spiritual 
marriage and a visible sensory effect. The effect that was depos- 
ited in the Tablet was like the sperm that is ejaculated into the 
womb of the female. The meanings deposited within the celestial 
letters that became manifest from that writing are like the spirits 
of the children deposited within their bodies . 197 

Even syllogisms are engaged in procreation. Deductive knowledge 
can only result from the “marriage” of two premises, which takes 
place when a single term is repeated. This constitutes the marriage 
act between them, and the conclusion that is “born” from them is 
thus called their “child ”. 198 

In many places throughout the Futiihat, as we have alluded to 
above, Ibn 'Arabl speaks about the relations between the ontologi- 
cal levels in terms of fathers, mothers, and children . 199 He states this 
principle as follows: “Everything that exercises an effect is a father, 
and everything that receives an effect is a mother. . . . That which is 
born between the two from the effect is called a son or a child .” 200 


195. For a masterful treatment of this theme in Islamic philosophy, see Murata, 
Tao of Islam, especially Chap. 5 (Macrocosmic Marriage). 

196. See Fut. II. 656, Chap. 292. 

197. Fut. I. 139, Chap. 11. 

198. Fut. I. 138, Chap. 11. 

199. See especially Fut. I, Chaps 11 and 21. 

200. Fut. I. 138, Chap. 11; trans. Murata, Tao oflslatn, p. 145. 


103 


Commentary 


God is thus the “First Father” and (non-existent) “thingness” is the 
First Mother. Marriage on this level takes place through the existen- 
tial command: Be! The child that results is the possible thing upon 
which existence has been bestowed. 201 This cosmic pattern appears at 
every level of creation, but other than the role of First Father, which 
is fulfilled by God alone, the rest of the existing entities take turns 
at being fathers and mothers, depending on whether they have an 
active or a passive role. For this reason, the Eagle/Pen/Intellect is a 
mother as well as a father, a Tablet as well as a Pen, although we see 
him in the Ittihad primarily in his masculine role. 

The four birds are thus related to one another in a variety of ways, 
the most evident of which is through a hierarchical descent. The 
Eagle, brought into existence by the Real, gives birth from himself 
to the Ringdove, through the agency of the Real’s command. Their 
mating, the tale of which constitutes a large portion of the Ring- 
dove’s soliloquy, results in the Anqa, who is the mother of the Crow. 
We are not told who the Crow’s father is, and the narrator does not 
pursue the genealogy further. 

The bird’s family tree, if we may call it that, is complicated, 
however, by the fact that they represent cosmological figures whose 
relation to one another is a serious matter of dispute. One member of 
the family, for example, appears to be altogether missing. 

Nature 

Anyone acquainted with the Shaykh’s extensive writings on cosmol- 
ogy in the Futuhdt and elsewhere will note the absence of Nature 
among these cosmic principles making up the family tree of the four 
birds. In Chapter 198 of the Futuhdt, for example, we find an enu- 
meration of the twenty-eight levels of existence that places Nature 
between the level of the Universal Soul and that of the Dust. In fact, 
the Shaykh explains that the level of Nature can only be between the 
Soul and the Dust, for “Every body that the Dust accepts, down to 


201. See Fut. I. 139. 


104 


Cosmic Marriage and the Genealogy of the Birds 


the last existing body, is natural .” 202 Nature’s authority extends from 
the Dust to everything below it, while the Universal Soul’s authority 
extends from Nature to everything below it. As for what is above the 
Soul, that is, the Intellect and what is above it, neither Nature nor 
Soul have any authority over it. 

In some instances, however, the Shaykh places Nature and Dust 
at an approximately equal level, Nature being slightly higher only 
because of its priority in time: 

Among those things that were cast [into the Soul] through a most 
sanctified, spiritual casting [that is, from the First Intellect] were 
Nature and the Dust. Hence the Soul was the first mother to give 
birth to twins. The first thing she cast down was Nature, which 
was followed by the Dust. Flence Nature and the Dust are brother 
and sister from a single father and a single mother. Then [God] 
gave Nature in marriage to the Dust. Born from them was the 
form of the Universal Body, which was the first body to become 
manifest. Nature is the father because it produces effect. Dust is 
the mother because within it effects become manifest. The result 
is the Body . 203 

This appears to answer the question of the Crow’s progenitor: his 
father is Nature. We should not be surprised at seeing Mother 
Nature personified here as masculine, for it only means that Nature 
is the active force in the marriage act between it and the Dust. But 
this does not solve the problem of why Nature does not appear in 
the Ittihdd at all. 

It is possible that a clue to this mystery can be found in a passage 
of the Futuhdt in which Ibn 'Arab! appears to completely reverse 
his position regarding the relative positions of the entities in ques- 
tion: “[T]hose who have placed Nature in a level below the Soul and 
above the Hyle . . . have no witnessing ”, 204 that is, they have not seen 


202. Fut. I. 261, Chap. 47. 

203. Fut. I. 140, Chap. 11; trans. Murata, Tao of Islam, pp. 156-7, modified. 

204. Fut. III. 420, Chap. 371; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 140. 


105 


Commentary 

things as they really are. lie goes on to resolve this contradiction by 
explaining that: 

If a person does have witnessing and [nonetheless] holds this view, 
he means [by it] that Nature which becomes manifest through 
its authority in the translucent corporeal bodies, that is, in the 
Throne and what it surrounds. This second Nature is to the 
first as the daughter is to the woman who is the mother; like her 
mother, she gives birth, even if she is a daughter born from her . 205 

Nature, it now appears, occupies two rungs on the genealogical lad- 
der. Thus far, we have only been concerned with that aspect of Na- 
ture which gives rise to physical bodies, from the celestial spheres to 
the four elements and everything in between. This “second Nature” 
is the cosmogonic Anqa . But as the Shaykh tells us above, there is 
an aspect of Nature that transcends this second Nature and occupies 
a rank even higher than that of the First Intellect and Universal Soul 
- a Nature which, Ibn 'Arabl says, “is more worthy to be attributed 
to the Real than anything else, since everything else becomes mani- 
fest only in that which becomes manifest from Nature, that is, the 
Breath [of the All-Merciful] , which permeates the cosmos .” 206 
Nature as first Mother is all-inclusive. Ibn 'Arabl equates this 
Nature with the Breath of the All-Merciful: “Universal Nature, by 
its form, comes before those things that derive their being from her. 
In reality, Nature is the Breath of the Merciful in which are unfolded 
the forms of the higher and lower Cosmos .” 207 Breath manifests as 
a vaporous Cloud - that symbolic representation of the totality of 
animated entities, generated at every instant through God’s loving 
mercy. With every flash of metaphysical light, the cosmos comes 
into existence, returns to non-existence, and receives new existence 
perpetually within God’s knowledge of Flimself. In every moment, 


205. Ibid.; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 140, modified. 

206. Ibid.; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 140. 

207. Fusils, p.219; trans. Austin, Bezels of Wisdom, p.277. 


106 


Cosmic Marriage and the Genealogy of the Birds 

an endless process of divine exhalation and inhalation breathes life 
into the entities, annihilates them, and revivifies them eternally. 

This Cloud is sometimes equated with the Reality of Realities, 
or Universal Reality. It is, so to speak, hayftld writ large. To give an 
example which, although provided by Ibn 'Arabl, is probably more 
familiar to readers of Plato, it is the Form of Knowledge as opposed 
to the Form of the chair. There is nothing that this Reality does not 
contain, since it embraces every concept, from the Real to the real, 
including the very notion of being itself: 

The Cloud is that which we have mentioned as eternal in the eter- 
nal and temporally originated in the temporally originated. This 
is like your words, or identical with your words, concerning Being/ 
existence. When you attribute it to the Real, you say it is Eternal, 
but when you attribute it to creation, you say that it is temporally 
originated. So the Cloud inasmuch as it is a description of the Real 
is a divine description, but inasmuch as it is a description of the 
cosmos it is an engendered description . 208 

Since this Reality is qualified neither by existence nor by non- 
existence, Ibn 'Arabl sometimes calls it the “third thing” and the 
“All-embracing Universal”, and says that it is from this third thing 
that the world becomes manifest . 209 Embracing all realities, particu- 
larizing them at will in a myriad of forms, this is the Anqd ’ in her 
noetic aspect. “Call it, if you wish, the Reality of Realities, or hyle, 
First Matter, or supreme genus. . . . This third thing can never be 
separate from the Necessary Being, standing parallel to It, without 
having entified existence .” 210 

There is still one more step we must take, one more form that 
the Anqd’ must assume to complete the triplicate aspect of her 
nature: that of the Universal Tree, symbol of the Perfect Human 


208. Fut. II. 63, Chap. 73, Question 31; trans. Chittick, SPK, p. 137. 

209. Insha’ al-dawa’ ir, p. 18. 

210. Ibid., p. 21. 


107 


Commentary 

Being, whose “shade extends over those whom God envelops in His 
solicitude”. 

The Perfect Human Being, and Muhammad in particular, is some- 
times depicted as the microcosmic counterpart of the Breath of the 
All-Merciful. We should recall that the Fusils begins with the divine 
exhalation that gives form to the cosmos and its likeness Adam, and 
it ends with Muhammad, the perfect vessel of mercy, who receives 
and gives form to the Divine Breath: “When Muhammad was cre- 
ated a pure servant, he had no ambition for leadership, but continued 
prostrating and standing [before his Lord], a passive creation, until 
God effected [Llis purpose] in him, when He conferred on him an 
active role in the realm of the Breaths .” 211 

Muhammad, then, also occupies two levels: he is both the prin- 
ciple and the aim of creation. The highest of these levels is called 
the primordial Muhammadan Reality, or the Muhammadan Light, 
which lies above the levels of spiritual and material creation. It is 
to this that the Prophet’s claim, “I was a prophet when Adam was 
between water and clay”, refers. The other level is his specific uni- 
versal mission as the Prophet Muhammad, the embodied Seal of the 
Prophets, who lived and died as a fully human being. 

The Perfect Human Being embraces all reality, divine and 
human, never known in itself, but only through relationship. The 
Perfect LIuman Being is a synthesis of all the words of existence, all 
Names of beauty and all Names of severity; a kaleidoscope of light 
and darkness; a heart that embraces every form, from mosque to fire 
temple; a microcosmic mundus imaginalis, where what is and what is 
not happily co-exist. 

The secret of the birds’ genealogy, therefore, lies in the Anqd " s 
unique position as First and Second Mothers - a fact that allows 
her to rightly claim that “nothing can be manifested that I am not 
in”. The 'Anqd’, as First Mother, gives life to all. In this sense, she 
strangely gives birth to her father, the Intellect, bringing to mind 


211. Fusils, p.220; trans. Austin, p.278. 

108 


Cosmic Marriage and the Genealogy of the Birds 


the paradoxical lines from al-Hallaj’s cosmological-alchemical poem 
“ Uqtiilum yd thiqdti ”: 212 

My mother has given birth to her father, 

What a marvel is mine ! 

And my daughters, ’though my daughters, are my sisters, 

Not by the act of time, no, 

Nor by the act of adultery . 213 


212. DTwan al-Hallaj, p. 125. See French trans. by Massignon, Husayn Mansur al- 
Hallaj, p. 54. 

213. See Ibn 'Arabl’s reference to this poem in Fut. II. 656, Chap. 292. Henry 
Corbin has discussed the perplexing line: “My mother has given birth to her father” 
in Creative Imagination, pp. 169-70. He also notes that the appellation of the Prophet’s 
daughter Fatima as “mother of her father” ( umm ablha) - an appellation attributed in 
Shi'ite sources to the Prophet himself - is an indication of the “Creative Feminine” 
alluded to in al-Hallaj’s poem (see Creative Imagination , p. 345, n. 65; p. 347, n. 70). 


109 



Appendix 


The Edition of the Text 


Ibn 'Arabl mentions the Ittihad al-kawnl once in his Futuhdt (11.351), 
as well as in two bibliographical works, the Fihrist and the Ijdza. 
Osman Yahia lists twenty-three manuscripts, 1 all conserved in the 
libraries of Istanbul. Denis Gril consulted ten manuscripts, two of 
which (nos. 5 and 8 below) were not mentioned by Osman Yahia, to 
establish the text. They are: 

1. Shehit Ali 2813 / no. 6 (fols. 26-33b), copied in ah 621 

Part of a collection of nine surviving treatises by Ibn 'Arabl, cop- 
ied by one of his disciples, Ayyub b. Badr b. Mansur al-Muqrl (or 
al-Maqqarl), in the presence of the author. The beginning of the 
Treatise bears a sama in the hand of the copyist, also apparently 
describing the work as Risdlat al-ahadiyya. At the bottom of the page 
in his AndalusI script, Ibn 'Arabl has appended an attestation of its 
accuracy: 

sahha ma dhakarahu a lahu wa-kntaba al-munshi’ ft tdrikhihi (the 
above-mentioned is correct, as written by the author on this 
date) 

This copy, certified by the author, constitutes the base manuscript. 
Some of its readings, however, remain tentative because of damage 
to the page margins and the copyist’s highly cursive script. 

2. Veliyuddin 51 / no. 6 (fols. 48-56), copied in ah 736 

Part of a collection of seventeen treatises of Ibn 'Arabl, copied by 
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Muthabbit in Jerusalem, who claims to 


1. Histoire et classification, Vol. I. p. 325, no. 317. 


Ill 


Appendix 


have taken it from an autograph copy, transmitted by 'Abdallah Badr 
al-Habashl, Ibn 'Arabl’s beloved disciple, who died around 618. The 
original manuscript, therefore, would antedate no. 1. 

3. Beyazit 3750 / no. 18 (fols. 277-286), copied in ah 782 

Part of a collection of thirty treatises by Ibn 'Arabl (excluding no. 12), 
taken from a copy in the hand of Shaykh Badr al-Dln Muhammad 
al-Zahidl in Aleppo. Contains some variants tracing back to an orig- 
inal that is probably different from nos. 1 and 2. 

4. Murad Bukhari 207 / no. 5 (fols. 71-95), copied in ah 875 

Part of a collection of six treatises by Ibn 'Arabl, copied by Jamal 
al-Dln ‘Abdallah b. Ibrahim from an original copy apparently in the 
author’s hand, which was read back to him and certified by him as 
correct. Derives from no. 1. 

5. Laleli 3741 / no. 6 (fols. 113-122b), copied in ah 904 

Evidently derived from no. 1. 

6. Carullah 2111 / no. 10 (fols. 63-69b), copied in ah 915 

Part of a collection of twenty-three treatises, nineteen of which are 
by Ibn 'Arabl, copied by 'Abd al-Samad al-Salihl al-Hanafl al-Sufl. 
Numbers 7, 8, and 9 seem to derive from this copy. 

7. Fatih 5322 / no. 19 (fols. 151-153b), copied in c. ah 934 

Part of a collection of thirty separate works, mostly treatises by Ibn 
'Arabl, some of which are commented on by Ibn Sawdakin. The 
poetry at the beginning is missing. It offers some variants similar to 
those in nos. 1 and 4. 

8. Haci Mahmud 2510 /no. 1 (fols. lb-16b), copied in ah 958 

Part of a collection of two treatises by Ibn 'Arabl; bears similarities 
to no. 5. 


112 


The Edition of the Text 


9. Halet Efendi 245 / no. 17 (fols. 353b-366), copied after ah 936 

Part of a collection of twenty-six treatises, mostly by Ibn 'Arabl; 
bears similarities to no. 5. 

10. Esad Efendi 1777 /no. 9 (fols. 158-172b), copied in ah 1004 

Part of a collection of eleven treatises attributed to Ibn Arabl, some 
of which are apocryphal. Copy is very defective, and derives from 
no. 2. 

There appear, then, to be three families of manuscripts whose trans- 
mission cannot be traced with precision. In the Arabic edition, all 
variants have been provided. 



Bibliography 


Addas, Claude. Quest for the Red Sulphur: The Life oflbn Arab T. Translated 
byP. Kingsley. Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1993. 

'Affifl, A. E. (ed.). Fusus al-hikam. See under Ibn 'Arab!. 

Arberry, A.J. (trans.). The Ringof the Dove. London: Luzac, 1953, reprinted 
1994. Translation oflbn Hazm’s Tawq al-hamdma. 

Attar, Farlduddin. Mantiq al-tayr. Translated by C. S. Nott, from French 
translation of G. de Tassy, as The Conference of the Birds. Boulder: 
Shambhala, 1971. 

Austin, Ralph (trans.). Ibn al-ArabT: The Bezels of Wisdom. Translation of 
Fusus al-hikam. New York: Paulist Press, 1980. 

Austin, Ralph. Sufis of Andalusia. 1971. Reprinted Sherborne, Glos: 
Beshara Publications, 1988. Partial translation of Ruh al-quds and al- 
Durra al-fdkhira. 

Austin, Ralph. “The Lady Nizam - An Image of Love and Knowledge”, 
JMIAS , VII (1988), 35—48. 

Bashier, Salman H. Ibn al-Arabl’s Barzakh: The Concept of the Limit and the 
Relationship between God and the World. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2004. 

Bayrak, Tosun, and Rabia Terri Harris. What the Seeker Needs. Putney, 
VT: Threshold Books, 1992. Translation of al-Istildhdt al-sufiyya. 

Beneito, Pablo, and Souad al-Haklm. Las Contemplaciones de los Misterios. 
Madrid: Editora Regional de Murcia, 1994. Translation of al-Mashahid 
al-qudsiyya. 

Bowering, Gerhard. The Mystical Vision of Existence in Classical Islam. 
Berlin: De Gruyter, 1979. 

Bursevi, Ismail Hakki. Ismail Hakki Bursevi's Translation of and Commen- 
tary on Fusus al-Hikam by Muhyiddin Ibn Arabi, Vol. 4. Rendered into 
English by B. Rauf. Oxford: Muhyiddin Ibn 'Arabi Society, 1991. 

Chittick, William C. “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the Fusus : ‘The 
Imprint of the Bezels of Wisdom’”. JMIAS, I (1982), 30-93. Partial 
translation of Jaml’s Naqd al-nususfl sharh naqsh al-fusus. 

Chittick, William C. “The Chapter Headings of the Fusus”. JMIAS, II 
(1984), 41-93. 


Bibliography 

Chittick, William C. The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles oflbn al-’Arabi’s 
Cosmology. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1998. 

Chittick, William C. The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-Araln's Metaphysics 
of Imagination. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1989. 

Chodkiewicz, Michel. An Ocean without Shore: Ibn Arab i, the Book and the 
Law. Translated by D. Streight. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1993. 

Chodkiewicz, Michel. Seal of the Saints: Prophethood and Sainthood in the 
Doctrine ofllm 'Arab!. Translated by L. Sherrard. Cambridge: Islamic 
Texts Society, 1993. 

Chodkiewicz, Michel (ed.). The Meccan Revelations , Vol. 1. New York: Pir 
Press, 2002. 

Corbin, Henry. Avicenna and the Visionary Recital. Translated W. R. Trask. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960. Reprinted Spring Publi- 
cations, Irving, TX, 1980. 

Corbin, Henry. Creative Imagination in the Sufism ofllm 'ArabT. Translated 
by R. Mannheim. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969. 

Corbin, Henry. Cyclical Time and Ismaili Gnosis. London: Kegan Paul, 1983. 

Corbin, Henry. Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth. Translated by N. 
Pearson. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977. 

Corbin, Henry. Temple and Conte?nplation. Translated byP. Sherrard, with 
the assistance of Liadain Sherrard. London: KPI, 1986. 

Couliano, loan Petru. Out of this World: Other Worldly Journeys from 
Gilgamesh to Albert Einstein. Boston: Shambhala, 1991. 

Culianu, loan Petru. Psychanodia I. Leiden: Brill, 1983. 

Dagli, Caner K. Ilm al-Araln: The Ringstones of Wisdom. Translation of 
Fusils al-hikam. Chicago: Great Books of the Islamic World, 2004. 

Eliade, Mircea. Images and Symbols. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1961. 

Eliade, Mircea. The Sacred and the Profane. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& World, 1959. 

Elmore, Gerald. Islajnic Sainthood in the Fullness of Time: Ibn Arabi’s Book 
of the Fabulous Gryphon. Leiden: Brill, 1998. Translation of r Anqd’ 
mughrib. 

Ernst, Carl W. “The Symbolism of Birds and Flight in the Writings of 
Ruzbihan Baqll”. In The Heritage of Sufism: The Legacy of Medieval 
Persian Sufism (1150-1500), Vol. 2, edited by L. Lewisohn, pp. 353-66. 
Oxford: Oneworld, 1999. (Originally published 1992.) 

Fenton, Paul, and Maurice Gloton. La Production des cercles. Translation of 
Inshd’ al-dawd’ir. Paris: Editions de l’Eclat, 1996. 


n6 


Bibliography 

Fenton, Paul, and Maurice Gloton. “The Book of the Description of the 
Encompassing Circles”. In Muhyiddin Ibn 'ArabT: A Commemorative 
Volume , edited by S. Hirtenstein and M. Tiernan, pp. 12-43. Shaftes- 
bury, Dorset: Element, 1993. Translation of Tnshd ’ al-dawd’ir. 

Giese, Alma. Ibn ArabT: Urwolke und Welt. Munich: Verlag C. H. Beck, 

2002. 

Al-Ghorab, Mahmud. “Muhyiddin Ibn al-'Arabi Amidst Religions and 
Schools of Thought”. In Muhyiddin Ibn ArabT: A Commemorative 
Volume , edited by S. Hirtenstein and M. Tiernan, pp. 200-27. Shaftes- 
bury, Dorset: Element, 1993. 

Gibs, Charles-Andre. he Livre des chatons des sagesses, 2 vols. Beirut: Dar 
al-Bouraq, 1997-98. Translation of Fusus al-hikam. 

Gloton, Maurice. LArbre du monde. Paris: Les Deux Oceans, 1982. 

Gril, Denis. Le Devoilement des effets du voyage. Paris: Editions de l’Eclat, 
1994. Translation of K. al-isfdr. 

Gril, Denis. Le Livre de I’arbre et des quatre oiseaux. Paris: Les Deux 
Oceans, 1984. Translation of R. al-ittihdd al-kawnT. 

Gril, Denis. “Le Livre de I’arbre et des quatre oiseaux ( Risdlat al-ittihdd al- 
kawnf)”. Annales Islamologiques, 17 (1981), 53-86. 

de Haas, Frans A. J. John Philoponus’’ New Definition of Prime Matter: 
Aspects of Its Background in Neoplatonism and the Ancient Commentary 
Tradition, Leiden: Brill, 1997. 

Al-Haklm, Souad . Al-Mu jam al-sufi. Beirut: Dandara, 1981. 

Al-Hallaj, al-Husayn b. Mansur. Diwdn al-Halldj. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub 
al-'Ilmiyya, 1998. 

Harris, Rabia Terri. Journey to the Lord of Power. New York: Inner Tradi- 
tions, 1981. Translation of R. al-anwdr. 

Hirtenstein, Stephen. The Unlimited Mercifier: the Spiritual Life and 
Thought of Ibn ArabT. Oxford: Anqa Publishing, 1999. 

Hirtenstein, Stephen. “The Brotherhood of Milk: Perspectives of Know- 
ledge in the Adamic Chy,” JMIAS, XXXIII (2003), 1-21. 

Hirtenstein, Stephen, and Layla Shamash. “Kitdb al-fand’ fT-l mushahada" . 
JMIAS, IX (1991), 1-17. 

Hirtenstein, Stephen, and Martin Notcutt. Divine Sayings: The Mishkdt 
al-anwdr of Ibn ArabT. Oxford: Anqa Publishing, 2004. 

Hoyland, Robert G. Arabia and the Arabs. London: Routledge, 2001. 

Hyman, Arthur. “Aristotle’s ‘First Matter’ and Avicenna’s and Averroes’ 
‘Corporeal Form’”. In Harry Austryn Wolfson Jubilee Volume on the 


Bibliography 

Occasion of His Seventy-Fifth Birthday, Vol. 1, edited by A. Hyman and 
S. Lieberman, pp. 385-406. Jerusalem: American Academy for Jewish 
Research, 1965. 

Ibn 'Arab!, Muhyiddln. K. al-'abadila. Cairo, 1969. 

Ibn 'Arab!. Anqd’ mughrib. For English translation, see Elmore, Islamic 
Sainthood. 

Ibn 'Arab!. R. al-anwdr. In Rasa’ il Ilm r ArabT, Vol. 1, pp. 179-94. For Eng- 
lish translation, see Harris, Journey to the Lord of Power. For German 
translation, see Radtke, Neue kritische Gdnge. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Al-Durra al-fdkhira. For partial English translation, see 
Austin, Sufis of Andalusia. 

Ibn 'Arabl. K. al-fand’ fl al-mushahada. In Rasa’ il Ibn Arab T, Vol. 1, 
pp.9-18. For English translation, see Hirtenstein and Shamash. 
For French translation, see Valsan, “Le Livre de l’extinction dans la 
contemplation”. 

Ibn 'Arab!. Fusils al-hikam. Edited by A. Aflfl. Teheran: Intisharat al- 
Zahra, n.d. (Reprint of Beirut 1946 edition.) For English translations, 
see Austin, Ibn al Arabi: The Bezels of Wisdom-, Bursevi, Ismail Hakki 
Bursevi’s Translation of and Commentary on Fusus al-Hikanv, Dagli, Ibn 
al- Araln: The Ringstones of Wisdom. For French translation, see Gilis, 
Le Livre des chatons des sagesses. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Al-Futuhdt al-Makkiyya. Edited by O. Yahya. Cairo: Al-Hay’a 
al-Misriyya al-'Amma li-l-kitab, 1977-. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Al-Futuhdt al-Makkiyya, 4 vols. Reprinted Beirut: Dar Sadir, 
n.d. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Hilyat al-abdal. In Rasd’il Ibn Araln, Vol. 2, pp. 271-80. For 
French translation, see Valsan, La Parure des abdal. 

Ibn 'Arab!. Inshd’ al-dawd’ir. For French translation, see Fenton and 
Gloton, La Production des cercles. For English translation, see Fenton 
and Gloton, “The Book of the Description of the Encompassing 
Circles”. 

Ibn 'Arabl. K. al-isfar. For French translation, see Gril, Le Devoilement. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Al-Istildh al-sufiyya. In Rasd’il Ibn Arabi, Vol. 2, pp. 301-16. 
For English translation, see Bayrak and Harris, What the Seeker Needs. 

Ibn 'Arabl. R. al-ittihad al-kawm. Edited by D. Gril. Annales Islamologiques 
17, 1981, pp. 53-86. For French translation, see Gril, Le Livre de I’arbre. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Muhadarat al-abrdr wa musdmardt al-ahydr, Part I. Edited by 
M. al-Namarl. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-'Umiyya, 2001. 


n8 


Bibliography 

Ibn 'Arab l. Al-Masd’ il. In Rasa’ il Ilm ' Arab I, Vol. 2, pp. 143-70. 

Ibn 'Arab!. Al-Mashahid al-qudsiyya. For French translation, see Ruspoli, 
Le Livre des contemplations divines. For Spanish translation, see Beneito 
and al-Haklm, Las Contemplaciones de los misterios. For English transla- 
tion, see Twinch and Beneito, Contemplation of the Holy Mysteries. 

Ibn 'Arab!. Mishkdt al-anwdr. For English translation, see Hirtenstein 
and Notcutt, Divine Sayings. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Naqsh al-fusus. In Rasa il Ibn ArabT, Vol. 2, pp. 281-92. For 
English translation, see Chittick, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the 
Fusils”. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Rasd’illbn Arabl. Damascus, 1998. (Reprint of 1948 Hyderabad 
edn.) 

Ibn 'Arab!. Ruh al-quds. For partial English translation, see Austin, Sufis 
of Andalusia. 

Ibn 'Arabl. Tarjumdn al-ashwdq. Edited and English translation by R. A. 
Nicholson, London: Theosophical Publishing House, 1911, reprinted 1978. 

Ibn 'Arabl. ’Uqlat al-mustawfiz. In Kleine Schriften des Ibn al- Arabl, 
edited by H. Nyberg. Leiden: Brill, 1919. 

Ibn Hazm, Abu Muhammad 'All. Tawq al-hamdma. Edited Makkl, Cairo: 
Dar al-Ma'arif, 1980. For English translation, see Arberry, Ring of the 
Dove. 

Ikhwan al-Safa’. Rasa’ il ikhwan al-safa’, II and III. Beirut: Dar Sader, n.d. 

Izutsu, Toshihiko. Sufism and Taoism: A Comparative Study of Key Philo- 
sophical Concepts. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California 
Press, 1984. 

Jaffray, Angela. Unveiling the Effects of the Voyages, forthcoming. 

Al-Jahiz, 'Amr b. Bahr. K. al-hayawdn, Vol. IV, edited by 'A. S. M. Harun, 
Cairo: Maktabat Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabl, AH 1359. 

Jam!, 'Abd al-Rahman. Naqd al-nusus fl shark naqsh al-fusus. For partial 
English translation, see Chittick, “Ibn 'Arabl’s Own Summary of the 
Fusils”. 

Jeffery, Arthur. “Ibn 'Arabl’s Shajarat al-kawn ”. Studia Islatnica, X (1959), 
43-77, and XI (1959), 113-60. 

Jung, Carl. Psychology and Alchemy. 2nd edn. Princeton: Princeton Uni- 
versity Press, reprinted 1993. 

Kopf, Lothar. “The Bird 'Aniiq”. In Studies in Arabic and Hebrew Lexicogra- 
phy, edited byM. H. Goshen- Gottstein, pp. 125-32. Jerusalem: Magnes 
Press, 1976. 


Bibliography 

Kraus, Paul. Jabir ibn Hayyan: contribution a I’histoire des idees scientifiques 
dans VIslam. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1986. 

Lane, Edward William. An Arabic-English Lexicon, in 8 parts. Reprinted 
Beirut: Librairie du Liban, 1968. 

Massignon, Louis (trans.). Husayn Mansur al-Halldj: Diwdn. Paris: Seuil, 
1981. 

Miftah, 'Abd al-Baql. Mafdtih fusils al-hikam li-Ibn Arab T. Marrakesh: 
Dar al-Qubba al-Zarqa, 1997. 

Morris, James W. “The Spiritual Ascension: Ibn 'Arab! and the Mi'raj”. 
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 107 (1987), 629-52, and 108 
(1988), 63-77. 

Murata, Sachiko. The Tao of Islam. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1992. 

Nasr, Seyyid Hossein. An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, 
revised edn. Boulder: Shambhala, 1978. 

Nicholson, R. A. See Ibn 'Arab!, Tarjumdn al-ashwdq. 

Al-NiffarT, 'Abd al-Jabbar. The Mawdqif andMukhdtabdt of Muhammad Ibn 
AbcliTJabbdr al-Niffari. Edited and translated by Arthur J. Arberry. 
London: Gibb Memorial Trust, 1935. Reprinted 1978. 

Pellat, Charles, s.v. “Khalid b. Sinan”. In Encyclopaedia of Islam. 2nd edn, 
edited by C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs, and G. 
Lecomte, p.928. Leiden: Brill, 1960- . 

Philpot, J. H., The Sacred Tree in Religion and Myth. Mineola, NY: Dover, 
2004. 

Pickthall, Muhammad Marmaduke (trans.) The Glorious Qur’an. Mecca: 
Muslim World League, 1977. 

QunawT, Sadr al-Dln. Al-Fukuk. Teheran: Intisharat Mawla, n.d. 

Radtke, Bernd. Neue kritische Gdnge, Utrecht: Houtsma, 2005. 

Rauf, Bulent. Addresses. Roberton, Scotland: Beshara Publications, 1986. 

Ruspoli, Stephane. LAlchimiedu bonheur parfait. Paris: Berg International, 
1981. 

Ruspoli, Stephane. Ibn Arab!: le livre des contemplations divines. Paris: Sind- 
bad, 1999. Edition and translation of Al-Mashdhid al-qudsiyya. 

Al-Sarraj, Abu Nasr. K. al-Luma r . Edited by R. A. Nicholson. London: 
Luzac, 1914. 

Schimmel, Annemarie.H Two-Colored Brocade. Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1992. 

Schimmel, Annemarie. As Through a Veil: Mystical Poetry in Islam. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1980. 


120 


Bibliography 

Schimmel, Annemarie. The Triumphal Sun. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 
1993. 

Sells, Michael. Early Islamic Mysticism . New York: Paulist Press, 1996. 

Sells, Michael. Stations of Desire. Jerusalem: Ibis, 2000. 

Steingass, Francis I. A Comprehensive Persian-English Dictionary. London: 
Routledge, 1988. 

Stetkevych, Jaroslav. The Zephyrs of Najd: The Poetics of Nostalgia in the 
Classical Arabic Nastb. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993. 

Stetkevych, Jaroslav. “Toward an Arabic Elegiac Lexicon: The Seven 
Words of the Nastb In Reorientations / Arabic and Persian Poetry, 
edited by S. Stetkevych, pp. 58-129. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1993. 

Stetkevych, Jaroslav. Muhammad and the Golden Bough: Reconstructing 
Arabian Myth. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996. 

Takeshita, Masataka. Ibn Arabt’s Theory of the Perfect Man and Its Place 
in the History of Islamic Thought. Tokyo: Institute for the Studies of 
Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, 1987. 

Thackston, Wheeler (trans.). The Mystical and Visionary Treatises of 
Shihabuddin Yahya Suhrawardi. London: Octagon, 1982. 

Twinch, Cecilia, and Pablo Beneito. Contemplation of the Holy Mysteries. 
Oxford: Anqa Publishing, 2001. Translation of al-Mashdhid al- 
qudsiyya. 

Valsan, Michel. “Le Livre de l’extinction dans la contemplation ( Kitdbu - 
l-fand ’ i fi-l-mushahada ) ”, Etudes Traditionnelles 363 (1961), 26-44; 364 
(1961), 89-98; 365 (1961), 144-50. 

Valsan, Michel. LaParure des abdal. Paris: Les Editions de 1’Oeuvre, 1992. 
Translation of Hilyat al-abdal. 

Wright, William. A Grammar of the Arabic Language, 2 vols. 3rd edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967. 

Yahia, Osman. Histoire et classification de V oeuvre d’Ibn Arab i: Etude critique. 
Damascus: Institut Francais de Damas, 1964. 

Yusuf 'All, 'Abdullah. The Meaning of the Glorious Qur’an, Vol. 2. Cairo: 
Dar al-Kitab al-Masrl, 1938. 



INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS 


2:30 

90 

28:31 

26n 

2:60 

27n, 72 

30:15 

50 

2:74 

72 

31:16 

72 

2:275 

25n 

36:80 

81 

3:40 

38n 

37:62 

81 

4:51 

45n 

39:67 

43n, 48n 

5:31 

98 

43:70 

50 

7:57-58 10 

44:44 

81 

7:60 

27n 

50:16 

58 

7:160 

72 

53:7 

29n 

7:176 

70 

53:14 

16 

8:17 

55 

54:10 

3 On 

12:31 

32n 

55:17 

40n 

13:13 

22n, 39 

55:54 

3 611 

14:24- 

-25 81 

55:76 

29n, 32n 

14:27 

3 811 

56:29 

37 

16:40 

19 

56:30 

37 

17:60 

81 

56:33 

35 

18:63 

72 

56:34 

35 

20:54 

48n 

69:17 

43n 

20:128 48n 

79:10- 

■11 33n 

22:18 

38n 

82:7-8 

: 27n 

23:108 50 

85:13 

47n 

24:34 

57 

89:9 

72 

24: 35 

48n, 57, 81 

95:1-5 

28n 

24:40 

48n 

95:4 

27n 

27:10 

2 611 

95:4-5 

5 

28:10 

50n 

112: 1- 

-2 72 


123 



index of Names and Terms 


Aaron 33, 34n, 73n, 79 
Abel 98 

Abraham 13, 33, 34n, 57, 58, 79, 101 
Abu al-'Abbas al-'Uryabl/'Uryanl 11, 
lln 

Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr ibn Sinan 5, 
25, 26, 50n, 51, 63, 69-76; see also 
Khalid 

Abu Madyan 12 
Abu Ya'qub Yusuf 9 
Abu Yazld al-Bistaml 16, 17, 55 
Adam 33, 35n, 78, 79, 81, 87, 89, 90, 
91, 108 

alchemy 23n, 37n, 83, 92, 98, 109 
'All ibn Abi Talib 94 
'ama’ see Cloud 

'Anqa' 7, 30, 35, 41, 44, 46-7, 67, 
71n, 78, 91-7, 104, 106-8 
'Anqa’ mughrib 41n, 93, 93n 
al-Anwdr 17, 17n, 32n, 79n 
al- 'aql al-awwal see Intellect 
Aristotle 94n 

'Attar, Farlduddln 16, 92, 93 
a'yan thabita (fixed entities) 41n, 103 
Avicenna 16 
'aym 60 

Baqil 24, 24n 

barzakh (isthmus, barrier) 29n, 50n, 
59, 64-8, 73, 75-8, 82, 102 
Blake, William 3 

Body, Universal ( jism kulli) 18, 51n, 
88, 99-102, 105 

Breath (of the All-Merciful) 41n, 

90, 106-8 

Buraq 12, 29, 29n, 32, 79 
Cain 98 


Cloud ( al-'ama ’) 30, 30n, 33n, 37, 
90, 107 

Corbin, Henry 76, 101 
Crow ( ghnrdb ) 7, 8, 30, 35, 47-51, 
64, 80, 92-3, 98-102, 104-5 

Diwdn 18, 96 
Dove see Ringdove 
al-Durra al-fakhira lln 
Dust ( haba ’) 33, 51n, 91, 94-5, 
100-1, 104-5 

Eagle {'uqab) 30, 35, 38, 39, 40, 

42-6, 47, 49, 84, 88-91, 93, 98, 
104 

Eliade, Mircea 82 
Eve 87 

fund’ (annihilation) 54, 59, 68, 77, 
79 

al-Fand’ ft al-mushahada 79n 
Fatiha 26n, 87 
First Intellect see Intellect 
Footstool ( kursT ) 33n, 44n, 62n 
Fusus al-hikam 1, 13, 14, 57, 58, 64, 
64n, 65, 67, 67n, 68, 73, 73n, 76n, 
82n, 87n, 96, lOOn, 108 
al-Futuhdt al-Makkiyya 1, 11, 13, 

14, 18, 20, 54, 55, 57n, 68, 69, 74, 
81,83,95, 100, 101, 103, 104, 105 

Gabriel 69, 81 

haqlqat al-haqd’ iq see Reality of 
Realities 

al-Hallaj 23n, 55, 56, 109 

haba’ see Dust 

hayuld see Prime Matter 


125 


Index of Names and Terms 


Hilyat al-abdal 74 

Hud 64n, 72 

Hyle see Prime Matter 

IbnMardanlsh 9 
Ibn Sawdakln 72, 112 
Idris 3 On, 33, 34n, 79 
Ikhwan al-Safa’ 95, 99n 
Inshd’ al-dawa’ ir 8, 16n 
Intellect (First) ( al-'aql al-avrwal ) 7, 
18, 45n, 49n, 85-6, 88, 90-1, 100, 
104-6, 108 
Is far 17, 79n 
ishhad 59-60 

Isrd’ (Night Journey of the Prophet 
Muhammad) 18, 18n 
K. al-Isrd’ 17 

ittihad (unification) 53-8, 77n 

Jabir ibn Hayyan 94 
al-Jami 65 

JannibnJann 26, 26n, 71 

Jesus 9n, 10, 33, 34n, 64, 79, 85, 93 

al-Jili 32n 

Job 6, 78 

Joseph 33, 34n, 79 

Junayd 16 

Jung, Carl 98 

Kayka’us 14 

kawn (creation; cosmos) 59, 59n 
Khalid ibn Sinan 63-76, 93; see also 
Abu al-Fawaris Sakhr ibn Sina 
Khidr lOn, 72 
KursT see Footstool 

Labld 70 

al-lawh al-mahfuz see Tablet 
likeness {mithl, mithliyya) 34, 35, 
35n, 37n, 82 

Lote Tree of the Limit ( sidrat al- 
muntahd) 12, 16, 38, 80, 81 
Luqman 72 


al-MahdawI, 'Abd al-'Aziz 12 
mddda see matter 
Mashdhid al-asrdr 16n, 72 
matter {mddda) 79, 87, 94-5, 101 
Mawdqi' al-nujum 16n 
Mercurius 89, 98 
mi’rdj 12, 16, 17, 34n, 68, 69 
mithl see likeness 

Moses 9n, 10, 26n, 27n, 33, 34n, 35, 
35n, 36n, 50, 50n, 54n, 71n, 72, 
79, 81 

Mount Qaf 81n, 92 
Mount Sinai 28, 28n, 78, 81n 
Muhddardt al-abrdr 66 
Muhammad 9n, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
16, 18n, 23n, 29n, 32n, 33n, 34n, 
37n, 48n, 50n, 54n, 57, 64, 66, 67, 
68, 69, 75, 76n, 78-81, 85n, 87n, 
89, 90, 94n, 99, 108 

al-nafs al-kullT see Soul 
Nature 51n, 54n, 62, 72, 75n, 83, 

99, 104-6 

al-Niffarl, 'Abd al-Jabbar 78 
Night Journey {see Isrd’) 

Nizam 13 
Noah 3 In 

Pen {qalam) 7, 32, 34n, 38n, 77n, 82, 
84, 87, 88, 90, 90n, 103, 104 
Perfect Human Being {insdn kdmil) 
8, 18, 26n, 28n, 31n, 34n, 35n, 
36n, 59, 60n, 64, 75n, 76, 80, 82, 
83, 96, 101, 107-8 
Phoenix see 'Anqd’ 

Plato 94n, 107 

Prime Matter {hayfda) 18,33,36, 
36n, 78, 88, 94-6, 98, 107; see also 
Matter 

al-Qari’ al-Baghdadl 9 
al-Qashanl 67 
Quss ibn Sa'ida 24, 24n 
Qutb (spiritual Pole) 82 


126 


Index of Names and Terms 


raqiqa/raqa’ iq (subtle thread/s) 40, 
42, 85, 85n, 86n, 88 
Raven see Crow 
Reality of Realities (haqiqat al- 
haqa’ iq) 8, 95n, 107 
Ringdove ( al-mutawwaqa al-warqa ) 
30, 35, 38-42, 44, 45n, 47, 83-8, 
93, 104 

Riih al-quds lln 
Rumi, Jalaluddln 6,98 
Ruzbihan Baqli 92 

Saba 33, 37n 

Sadr al-Dln Qunawi 6, 64, 73, 74n 

Sahl al-Tustarl 94 

Sakhr ibn Sinan see Abu al-Fawaris 

Salih 64n, 76n 

samad/ samadiyya 72-4 

al-Sarraj 16, 17 

Second Matter 99; see also Matter 
Shajarat al-kawn 81 
Shu'ayb 64n, 82n 
Simurgh 92 

Soul, Universal ( al-nafs al-kullT) 7, 
18, 85-6, 88, 100, 104-6 


Stetkevych, Jaroslav 19n, 71 
Suhrawardi 16, 93 

Tablet ( lawh ) 7, 34n, 36, 77n, 82, 

84, 86-7' 90, 103-4 
al-Tadbirat al-ilahiyya 16n 
Tarjuman al-ashivaq 13,18,20, 

84-5, 99 
Thamud 72 

Throne ( al-'arsh ) 28n, 31, 32, 33, 

35, 36, 43n, 44, 49n, 51n, 106 
Tree 7, 8, 30, 31n, 34, 35-8, 80-3, 
97, 107-8 
Tuba 81, 83 

Universal Body see Body 
Universal Soul see Soul 
'Uqlat al-mustawfiz 16n, 51n, 100 

wahdat al-wujud (Unity of Being) 3, 
60 

Zaqqum 81 


127 



al-lttihad al-kawm 
ft hadrat al-ishhad al-'aynT 
bi-mahdur al-shajara al-insdniyya 
wa-l-tuyur al-arba'a al-ruhdniyya 

Muhyi al-din Muhammad 
b. 'All b. al-'Arabl 



Arabic text by Denis Gril 


jU^yi <ILujj 


^ ‘i i * 1 1 jl (j <7iV I a j 


<aj L^jji I <*_ij V I jj) »utl J <_uLi.ij.i VI a I jy 


: 2 - -t .i i. ^ Vi y>j 33 - 26 3 ) 2813 ^ ^ ^ - m 1 - j>° j 111 

J <lv : J4JV 4 - .(286 - 277 j) 3750 ^ ^ L 3 - -(51 - 48 3) 5 1 Jj 

JjU^ jIj- ; jI>. 6 - .( v 69 - 63 j) 2111 <W A : A 5 - .( v 122 - 113 3) 3741 
: ^l-.( v 153 - 151 3) 5322 j^U : 7 - .(95 - 71 3) 207 

1777 tf-nil l-l : Di .(366 -v 353 3) 245 ^1 oil- : cJU ,( v 16 - v 1 3) 2510 
.<_i>KiVI ^Lat-lJ Li <ajiLal I I i-Q.j.-aj jla_il •(<— » 172 — 158 3) 

^ I j^V ^ 6 ( :^_1 ^jLUl I JJb ^ l.ai.ij <jJ_i ) (***) j-i- 1 l _j-i I 4 . m q 1 1 4 '"' < \ . jLa—iVI <JLujj i j g < ~~i 

iJjiaj ^^LujV I ‘Oil ^ILa Lg-aJaLa ^Jc (<CJ) n~N al I <JL_ujll 6JJ& ^j-L <j -la.V I ,jV jL^jVI <1 x1^) <j» 1^V I <JLcuj 
,jj jJJ 3? ‘-0*1 Lj lj ^LlaJI ^^-aliLaJ I ^Jjxll ^jA ,Ui.a. I ^jA ^lc ^jA J-a.=>-a <11 1 J-iC I jJ I ^ i~* a <jl_La. 

<ill J_ic ^jjjll 3 C jJj 1 A I^j I JU'.'I ^_il Jj-ijll 3 *-® J-*^Lftll ^.j-taLaJ I I (j a a 1 11 Q ^jAaJ I j^x-a. la 

jl jj <j I o"i < 1 ij ^jAjjjdC . j <1 loj »dl j j <1 Uq~k j <iaj ^ic <jlx.lj |\ la II a Lub j <j £_aj j <11 1 <xaj 1 1 -"j®! I 

(dllj Ja_i ^c-i^alj jac) ••• £-axxlaJI 

. ‘La-ijLi ^jjuxaJ I >_u^j 6^Lc I 6j^ j La ^mVi I la-1 ^ < uljj I la~>. )J 

^jljAll ^1 ^j-lxJojV I ^-ajLaJI LlaJ I I ^jA <U I _UC ja I _V.a.?>-a 7_)j ^ic. ^ja L^_i ._ui5> + 

jJ-j <111 JjC. -Uia-a ^-il I ^-flj ■ <-il I <_> Ijj .^jJLal <11 1 I A(| jLJIj Jj^JI iajl ilULa I \i 1 1 ^ja j^a -ea 

j^a Jj ji »_fl jji_al I Lg.~4.lc . ^ L | j <11 1 <Aflj <lc ^a I I £* jlil I I Llil I ^a I ^ Tif I <11 1 .Uc ^ja 

. Lai <11 1 4-ajkj I g 1 1 1 1 ju> la.2k C.uuui ^jA .Ui.a-a -Uia I 4_ij 

.Ui.a_a ^jxijl ^1 1 ^j_il ^yl| ^jjUall ^_ajLaJI ^j_^C I ^ A <-a^Lal I » ' ■" 1 1 J 1 ■ n L^fll^a Lg_i <_n^ + -jL^ 

•‘La^a.jj <lij jLl-a ^ 




I I <il I i l \ 

2 a-L < ij <■ v^k.x.^aj <Jjj J-a^k-o LjJ-U-u ^JLc. <di I ^.L^j 

.*> 

<_) 1 ^ 1 '. /VU k ) I 1^1 ~V J) A-J l ) L£ I JJb 


cr 11 -^ 1 t^b ^ 1 *> 

cr*J 0 -°J 

ls^j^ o** 

tfBUI 

JLOI 

- * 

< _ S J| J-oa 

LT*J ^ 

cr 11 ^ Lr*J 0 ^ 


LT 1 ] (J -^ 1 ^ 1 i> 

Jl ^° J 

^Li^l ^1 yJiLLi ^y>j 

I LT 1 ] j' ul . u “'- <>J 
L^i cT^S-^ l>J 

lT 0 ^ lT 1 ! i>J 

^1 ^ ., AuA- . <>_9 

<^J>=“- LT *1 <^->^ j i >-5 
V -^ 1 L^i LS^-k l>J 


uu (JL5 + : Jjfl i Vi ^ 
_ i jJ I ^_l a_a J) 'Q - ^ '1 1 

<111 jjjLall <111 J-iC. 


^Lalj jj jLl I ^ ' ■ " bjxsiC. 6j_iSJ ^ v i ii < . " ■ \ a 1 1 ^ LoV I w > . V. 1 1 LiaL^ I ' \ ' . > i jj 

<j <11 1 <3 L<j Ltal I ^_aj L=J I ^^J^JlI I ^yi L 'jj ( e ic L jj J-a.-k_a <11 1 _U£. 

^^UJI ^LUI ^-JjaJI _ _ 

. ^ i . . i -v 1 1 i \ i*^ j d if <111 I ar 

cj a~kjj j) i ^-i -k a 1 1 jJ-ll I jJ) ■ ^ 'al I _U^-ai I j n^l I j_U<=JI J^.jVl jJLsJI ^LaVI £^xll JLS + :cJUk - jU. 

<j l£ Lla_aj j <lc. bu <11 1 ^ lAj ^_ljJ jj V I ^-ali LaJ I LLJ I jaJ I J-ft.=>-a ilfi -Uk 2 >-a <11 1 _U£. I <jj 

‘La^lc.^j 

L - (3) 

:jj-ul - -ujj L - Jj (4) 

t_gjj L>J : -^l (5) 


Y 


^1 <>J 

LT*J tr 0 ^ 1 <>J 

l r 1 ] (j- 0 ^ <>J 

(jS- 0 ^ A *>J 

J> 

A o-°j 

lt 1 ! ^ 

Jl tf\ i-u4 ^>j 

* 

L>-»^"^ A <>J 

1 i 

jac Jj^jil 6 lj| LoS 

£ o p 

(JLAJ 1 ^-saLo 7 ^_u J-=U jj- 0 

l 

t5 J ^ A 15 J *-' 1 


0 ^ 

Lr lL ? . JL^LlI ^Ij jL 

^Li Li ^Ll Lj 

^Lia ^Jt 8 ^L.l Li 

0 

^JL^ajI ja 0 .L^i jA*i 

? 

(£jAC. CjSLxI i£. La ^Juli 

% 

Lu-> ^ La ca-i^U 

0 J* 

iS b-^ 1 ^ LS i^ ^ 

: I lj[ 

tjLaSJI Ijjs u& Jljl V 


[f_jLAa] 

0 - 0>? 

(J^J* LT*J L-°J 

lA jI A L- 43 

0 -- 

iJl A* 3 *>J 

Ji 


[c>] 

A A ^>J 

<J\ LT^ 

0 

n. J <_L *i i ^Lj 



■«3l :jye 4 ,6) 

.^.Ij : j_ljjI — Jjjj L — ^Jj 

<Lr i!j| ij : Jj-uI (8) 


r 


LX^ lT*J 

0 % 

jJ I C . tuJ I (J. 1 a^> 

0 

^J LS-^ 

,J> 

L 5 JJJ - < V J“' ^ JlH9 

,J> 

lT*J ‘- >oj 

0 J. 

u^ 1 ^ U*^ is^JJ 

0 

irH lt*J *>J 

0| 

(j-^ 1 cr*% (J-^jj 

0 - 

0 J. 0 

lt'J 0-°J 

^..LU\.I < G»tjj 

Lf*i <>.J 

S! * 

^jnX ^ J^illl 

Jl iSJ^ 0-°j 

of 

12 ^ J 


tr=-jj lt*J i^^- 1 0-°J 

' _ < j *j) JJ^U 

o 

^J lX^^ t>-9 

-> 

Jj J-CUi ^.U.l I JJA$ 

0 

lT*J lt"- 0 -^ 

^ 0 

^ J! LT^I *>J 

LX**^ lT*J ^ S - a -"‘ J - > 0-°-S 

cs- 1 -^ ^ ^LS j£J 

O' 0 J. 

cr 0 ^ lt*J cr“^ 1 0-°J 
11 ( ^jLJG <US JJU_u_l 

^1 ^ -'■■■ A> J-oj 

V L> JaL *1 jJi 

^jJj ^1 ^,uJU 

LLGJI 


■ 0 a_'U :jaaj| ^ 

JJ 0-°J JJ ^5 ^-“ l>J + : - ij - iJ ' “ ^ (10) 

- Jj (U) 

. i L. ' .l.l I : j.» u I ;_)l-2k (^-2) 


i 


iJl 0-°J 

Of 

14 j-°JL9 

ta^ 1 LT*J 0-°J 

5L jl 

0 > 

J'l’x 'I I J_L_U LJ I Jjil 

0 

I 4 \ I ' J Li 


0 .* J* 

LftJ*- iJl l>J 

jlj^l 13 fl>s 

H | 

lt*J 1^ 1 1>J 

SI f 

°>° ^ J“ j i_A^ 
j Lj aifJ 

JjjA^JI JjlUJI Jj2j 


L^bjl 

17 i _ )Ii? J lj Ciill I £ jjj 
| ^j_o JaaU 
JjjAajJI 

OX OX 


JU j3 JjsU. 

cs-Lfjjj Jej^ lS-4 

Jj U-i. ' >Ti <Ua (_>“-> LS 

IjJ IjLo ^LJI (jla 

18 JjJ_o_o <dl I j-txLfl 


j-aA^aI ^JuaJ I jl.fl.A7iV I 6^xA*i I 19 jLaJjVL <JLujil 6JJ& Oxoojjj 

^j-J j" 1 *- < x^» I^Al I Ll I (j * O-lLLA ‘4 u 1 1 1 4jU^)V I jj^ ' L 1 1^ 4 a J < <■ aV I Nj-s. .7.1 I 

Jjj-aj I ^jJJlL-u I <111 L J <J Lu ji I (J J I 6 jjb J J LuJ I J Jj^J I <_0 j I dll La Lieu 

. I j <j l.^eu u 




iOMI e^] Jj <13) 


. ^ ■ . i*\ ' ^_i Ls J I ^_i L4.r^ ^j.i.tJ ! 1 1 1 1 

.^ujill :j_i_u| — jjj_> L . ( __)iuVI :^=kL^ — jU. — 

.^^uj^JI :^-L.i.A.I I <L)l5j ^3 
. ^jjj jjsi I ^3 ; j_i_u I 
. J^.^o : I c Ll3j ^3 
.jL^-j^I icJL^k — jL=k. 


(14) 

(15) 

(16) 

(17) 

(18) 
(19) 


£ULJL + < 20 > 


0 


I v-_ h j ji I <U I I jl I <U I ^-cu-> 


^ HI I jjfc 111 I ^ LicJ I <J | j Lt-j I j llLal I j oJ llLcJ I <_ ) jj III I j oJ III I | 

>> ? 

V (_£jJI j I I <<111 <LLlI ^j^Llll <^1111 jjL-uJIj 

jKjV! J-ola-o < c j_u 3IIL1 OjJUoJIj ( jllxlil Cjjuloil <6 Jj^»j (J^-^ (^Ul ^.llll 
jLVI (jL-ojil <4i4^>.j ,jLJI <H-ifij jliJI jlL -u-oj jj l5Lo VI Hauaj 

(jL-ujVI <J^ (jl?* <J^L$ tJ^V^ ^j LUL tij (jVl <1x3 Jj ^j-o^jil ^j- 'u .L- n j 

J j_=J I <Lo^) I till Lo I.U 11 J )^ l^^ll I ^-1 1 < Lux2k»oJ I 1 1 & 1^1 I lint V I 

< u I ^-ol I 1)-®^ l^ Lfifx 11 1 <l<_u jl 4 J I 1 1 a l^al I 1)-® <1 <11 I 1 1 u 1 1 1 < LuJ 1^ 

. 6 l^ j Ij 4-0-1 I £_x3jl I H-O 0 )^ > L~ > k.l tiJj l-XO 2 ^x^Lcu < La^Lc I J L^-Lo^ I <J.<J.< ijJ-ol I 


.<jl £ jjj ^Lu <111 




LT^J f-d?** O^- 1 S JL9-^ (jAj tS^ l s^l <L ^ ■ iAi - 1 ls- 1 ^ ^ L * 1 

^rijfij U-^ a H ^ 22 C^J 5Ai ^ . VV4 , r^ ^ f 1 

./^Ll VI >_iiaLk I LxS 

v f ? •• f f 


^iljj Li Ij^=».j 

(j| (jr“ 

jtj <>j 

<>j 

* < 0 

J'Lp t sJ Jl 


tS y M ^ ^ jJi 


[■U.u<n] 

•jj t^U' 

>> 0 0^ t 

Lc jJa o.L<^ ^ju I Q.Uj 

a f 

(j-*J lt^ 

O^j ls-^j O^j 


a * p 

5i *< - 

^ Jl ^ 


• _^ij| + IJj^i Li — ^ 22 * 

.OJ :^La - JdV (22 > 


1 


JL^j 

o f 

cjLqJjla I jj.Vj.c- 

^L!s j^Jt ULi Ji* 
oUJI J* u^- 

( k,ji 

^jLoo_u j -Lu Loj^ ^Jj 

^LUi ^ jUi 

^Lp. ij±x> ^Ij Jpl J* 


ls L ^ ^ 23 J^j 

G'jpJI jfr 4 

Ca^V 6 l.V.^k.1 I ^kjic. (_£ J-A 
^lo v-_SlxLJJI (_^j-t-u ^li 
^.uo ^ I^jJ I ^5Ll» I Cjj»^Q 

u**- <> p4>*?- lt 1 ! 

s5 >> 

^iljj Ijpj ^ilj oL^j 

o a -• P 

lt^ g;-^ 1 Hj 


(^jpJs J>laj 

p p >" * e p 

^Li Li ^Li Li Li (J> .^^.^. Li 

^^jILlxuJI <.\ m-o.1 lj I^Tu.uV L <.\5Lual 1 24 <Juj-oil ^j_c ^Jj v_j L5U Li jju L>i yi 

£_oLaJlj ^j^aJlj p Loi I ^j-o ^£j-i_u-oI I jUlj Jau o jJ-L <^ja!L <JL-ea^_oi I 

6jj^Llxi Loj ^JLuj ^JLu ^■ OJ L £^~*l Ljjlo ‘L>^LL_o J.L a lj ^j-i-u^. I 

6 JJ& L^ol I Lc. OJukjj 6 JJb L-u-ol I o^icl 111 CiX ij LJ <j| t^JJjj ^J- 0 
Ca^j^J <Lo$J I jl Jj OjJaa-ol <6 j£.Lu-ol lj <Aalj^JI ^.^w. i ^jLklll 25 t jl^j 
^jfllo) Lu :cJ^S 26 <^JjVIj 6 j^.V I cJulxS j^o_i CaXSjj <1-0x11 6J-4 

Jj I j-i V I L-a2kJ I jj^>J I <LL L-oj I jiji I <Lc.^L>j ^j I jj^J I j I jJ I j <j LkJ I 

dlllA o^jc.j ‘iJLlo jac. (J I jkV I .LA jjlfl <ioa^UI o-ul JkLJI L)-iL. y_c i^jlj-iVL 
<LXJ^V I S l-k^J ^ I ^J-J-Lol I Lh° ^ LuoV I jallO f^J^xlxA I 


.JL^i :pli - <ill jU. - L - Jj ( 23 > 
.,^^1 + :cJ^ - pU - Ju (24 > 

.jL^a < n \l I <LjAj * 2 ^* 
. Llj i_jk] Jpa O-u Ls_a j-^-J ^j-3 :cJk — ^cjLa — jk * 2 ^* 


V 


S QtiLA Lo jjj <-xS L I La j OJj-A 3 LfLI I 3-° 6 LlU jjx I j < 6 L J^. I j : Q~Vi-^a ^xj 
i^jAoJI ^ <^1 ^ J jjLj Jjlj <Lr ic 27 £jU. Vj ^ Ji-ljV ^.LkLlI OAAuii 
0-1 1 3 -1 I * o Ip LfLiV Ij o-i I 3- 1 I , — J 1^ ,,% ^ I j 0-1 1 3- 1 I S<_^^3 I ■ « I L< * v ^ ^53 

f. f. > > f. f. f. f. f. f. * 

j-L_J I j O-i I 3“* I L$3 I > i~x~xj O-i I 3 -1 I 1 33V ^ 3 -0 | *“ J “ 1 1 3 -1 I v — ^ j Ls^J 3 

<3J_Ll3I oLj^JIj Ou I 33 <^-ojxVI SjjJI L^xj oi I 3^ I LoJiJIj oj I 33 ‘j^-AjVI 

29 o£jLx-JIj Oj I 33 oljLujVI 6 j.*A^.j oil 33 <<.<.*4.^.3 I 28 oLijVIj oj I 33 

f. f. f. * f. f. f. f. 

Oj I 3^ I < Lu3 I £^j^3 Ij oj I 3^ I LiJaJ I 6^ *x .a VJ Ij Oj I 3^ I 1 O I j-° L<- u -3 Ij oj I 3^ I 
Oj I jjj I 31 L3 I I jaJ Ij oj I 3^ I ( U jji I <JajA.3 I j oj I 3^ I Llixi I <jjjJlI I j 
(J-ojjxj V ^.ULo oj l j 3 ^*^ I 3 ^- 3^VL Ju^i u_Li^ L SJJLJI 

! 3e-^* 


C f. ' 0 '° c f. 

&j.xA~x OjI Sq-ClKTi J-oLLo dlj I Quo, if. Lo I c QuxK I j3 jJ^ljJI L^-l I :oJ3a 

> o m f. f. _ S' 

<jj&I3Ij 3jj-l 3I 30 <L2iJjjlj LuuJ I <j3JI 6,1a Lj I j Ij ^jV I ^j£. (_£jJUa 

^ ii ii 0 

jAi i » I V | ! 6 Llj^x I j ^cj-c<aj 3-^ J ‘ ej-uii I j ^j^.Vi.1 1 *—i J ji Ij 3^°^ I 3 '^ XmA 1 ^ I 

3-0 I J Ij-oV I 6 3 a ^aJa^Lj 3^ 3”° | OJ I 3 Lfl I ^ijJJJXJ I 

^j£.l Vj 31 *»_Sjiaj 6 j^ I V 131 ^JjJVI JjJjl I3 a SLjIjla 


3jjj j-L-ajj I : oJ3a . 32 jx3uli c_>jJi-o 3 j| :Jl3j j 31*4,0 jjj*” ^j3=x <31 ^3i j.*x.4 

^ ^ * * 

Jlii -3 j-oj V ^31 jjL-31 ^ijilj 3^°^ I (5 j3I <jL4 3jo 3-° ^j3o3 1 

^3Lilj <31 Lola .3 j3Lqj 3-° >3jxJ-o.i Lo^ :q.U S^jj^jj 3-° ^jj-^^-J v-^lis 

P 0S< > % 

Lj I I(J I ~j Q ! Lj | Lj \ r'*\K a" j| I ^ j Q ‘""j^ I ^ j a ^ ' 1 1 jsj^ j . ^il I jjr 


... La.jLk... iLklj (27 ^ 

.oLul (28) 

.oljjUJI :^jlj (29) 
,<=J1I :^La - jU. (30) 

7T. . ^ I j J jljj i ( 3_jia * ^ ■ ■■ 'I I ‘LiAj * 3 3 ' 

N . ■ i Y :o£ ^jiJI Sj^ _>kil (32) 


A 


Lj dL l^j Lo ^jJJtJ I 6^3 L llfl !}L$-uu 4 xa_uV^ ^L-A I I > ~ v ^) A V IqJaA ! I ' ~v j a 

^ ^ILuj^Li ^JLc. ^y\.\.y.~->l\ Ij : 0.143 SdLL-<al Lo ^jjSDI 6 jjo_uI 

Jj^Jlo Jj^_o ^Lioj JjJ^-o ^^-olcj Jj1a-o JjJ-cui ^ji I1 a 

6 1a Qt.\3 jl$ Jj^jil 4-oJ^ ^C.j| 33 J^jJt-o ^-oJLc. ^3 lilj jjiJLo ^jjJJa-oj Jj^.j_o 

Li^J I ^.j. i » V 1^ ^J 1-O.^w^J I P l^u II V I J^C. O-iC-^5 b^V I 6 1 a Qau^Lj Lx£.V I 

f- *, z ' % f. f. 

.<^lJL jj.a A*> l Vj 34 <l^-JJL jo_ ul Jj I ^JufLol 

tOJtijj p b u ii V I u^uAi b p l-o . a uV I CA ^^Lc. V I Cjjj& ^v^JaV I >Q u.3 15^ -ij L® 

Loj I Sjjljj LufcjJI <CAJ I <LoJJa ^j-o dll JjV ^jSLIj Q bj^ b «— jLJVI 35 OdiSj £“ IjiV I 

•oi^-^l Uf^b 36 o^b <_*b^ f*^b f-^b 

^j_o CuA^ . i3 ^j-oLoJj ^ \» Uflj ^jl CA\ f^^-oLol jjLfLlI ^j-o ljj| ^jl *Q*-o.a ,, Lodixi 

55* * * * 9 ■*. J* '° * 

olSLLoj i 4J L1I1 S^j-uul ^ l<~ Ci*ijj 4_o^J I J^I^j 1 (j * o^^j^ <1 a ^ 1. \ a! I <1 a IUI I <*1 h 

^J La : plifl i £ I j-«-ui I (Jj Loj <Ua (Jj Loj I £ L^jj V I ^ Ho Lllx^oj I ^J j < u_Sj LijJ I 

0 -- 0 * _ »> 

<jjj I :^J ,Ju4a < <Lj o-a < >.a « i.^. I Lo :ol4s <^HVI dKj^. :iJj1s Lo-<.<J I 

< Lll I Lll I L^-jJJa_oj Llii I ^ HI ^j£. ^Ic <4 14^.1 1 : o.L4^ ! <j oj I Lo dL dJj Li 

xr 1 - 0 -* L^ujj ^ u JU-j Lflit jc. 

UxJI LJI ^ Lilj La*JI ^ LS^“ ‘ C y- La ^b :Ci ^ 

J> X J. 

yr^ f 1 LT 0 -^ (^ Lr°^s f 1 ^ ^ (^ A 1 'j 

(JT^ 3 V' J ^' 5 ^ 37 1; ^ ;iAUi -9 tf* 

Lr"- 0 ^- 0 S^i.VI SjiLJI 


. : cJ A — £tj La — j A ^ 3 3 * 

.fc^l :J<J V < 34 ) 

. o JJ-a :jjjj L * 33 * 

.j^JI :cJA - ^La - jU. (36) 
(37) 

-Jj ,38) 




40 O^J J ! cr® J^JS (A ^ 11 OJJ ^ 1 * 9 J&LLj 
A <jA -3 AA tA A A 42 c£-p^?-j A U-sLL-^b L^iiU^I £_o 

. 45 2 _>jJI 4 y^u.ll ^ ^.Kj.tij 43 jj^VI j^l 


<-u_oLuJI t 46 jj-JuoJ I L^-il :cJiS^ S^.W. ^y> dLLrk I J LS~*^ L>° dlL^. Ijjfc iJlS 


Jj j I : j-u.LoJ I (J lii . j^LI I j 1 jj L j^LJ I jjJall I j jjJall I j L 

I (J L^ V 1^ dl‘m. > ^.\A. \ cd-Qa_u^j ^-Oo_u^ ! ■**« l&fl . ^-lia-J I < Lu_u Lo 

Aa<*J I <-u_uLLo ^jjLa c*s j.**-* ijlai . ^J_i_u_uJ I p L jj I 1 *> Jaiq .1 I I La J.u^. 4 . 11 1 

0 % M 

^ij dljj^. dJjj^kj ^-oAc. ^ V <4iflrk.ll ^5s.^ 

:JU .dUji ^ j ^La ^Lkl^jl 


. ,” t X-s. <j Lq ^kJLJJ CaaLc, dJ-J I Q-ftlf- 


6 jP^j-L I 0 ^_La 3 <UlU Li < 5 j i ^ j a I I 4 J*\ 1 1 Lu-Uuil I 6 ^ 2 k_uj v |XJ 

p I. x s» >o/ ■; / jn 

I 4 } L^r. 1 «=■ Ij-u I j_u La j-ojj 47 p Lu_ui I L^c. jij cu □ L$.L^ I 

Oo.li . 1 ^ La jjj I <4j_L<J I j c_j L4xl I L^-j Lia 1 ^£jj ^j-&j L4ixl I <Lajja1 I j I jaJ I UjLj 


j. 0 * 

!*illLJI dll LJI L^_i] ^_cu_u I cJL «dilj ^j-o jj-uuik.Lj Q. 6 ^-k.i.Ttl I L 5 Jfi. 


.luLulil + :cJU - ^L i - jU ,39) 
LS^ :oJLa. - ^dili - jU. (40) 

. I < A ft I j — ^}L_u]l <Liic. — » q ■ ■ <j ' ^ 11 ~wj :cJLk. — ^cjLa — jL^ * 4 ^* 

.‘Ll^JVI :cJL=k — ^diLa — jL=^ 

.(j^Vl ...^) - :cJl^ - ^li -jU. (43 > 
“.^LJI :cJl^ - ^li -jU. (44 > 

<uLu^VI ^jla^Lkj J^Vl ^jliiuJI ^ ^U-Llaj J ^3 ^jlLkj : L 5 A^ ‘Aj^ ^ ‘lS ^-5 <45) 
^L^_aVI jj LU.r. ^a I ■ A n|j Sj-Aj ,_j-s ^ \ < n's.j ^ ^ L.'*^ ^ 11 “H 

.^_jj^JI j i^-i'h 1 1 ^a ^K'^J I jj-JI ^j-a <Li^JVI 
.^iUI :cJLk ,jU < 46 > 
XI :U ^ 1^1 Sj^ (47) 


c j \ I \ A 1 I j d Q j < -*> 1 | d \ 1^ 1 I *N. , V, I | d \ Us 


‘ 4 A I i ‘r'l 1 I 1^ <L^_ul jJI I l**> 1 ,J <1 < I < A i I 4< A I "V t I <1 \ 1^ t I i < I I I Ll | 

Cj I J Lli J_oV I i ^ j I x ^ < ^jC. 6 j^_u_»xa < J_iV I I ' i ' i < I Jj i u i i^C 

Ja’u < i. > V Lo t«ij Lt-ol I j ^ jlxl I J-CJ ^j_c ola^. < Jj ^£j_ojj _b_uJO.j 

jaC. ^i^lij <C.jij_o ^jLji ^i jj <v-iaLlalil jlja_ulj <-oxL_uJ I (J^ixJI 

« ,l„" *0 *. 0 " ll 

<JojL$J li JjJLx-aj -LjjlA ^C-Jjij J I Jjfc L5 i^_uj 48 < <£.JAA_oVj <£.jJaAo 
6^ I J.U mV I ^£-3 dill) j£ ^Utu < 6 J l.<."u dV 1^ ^a I JaJJ 6 -1C. L^J 1^ 6 jliV 1^ Sill 
Jc. JjIaJI SjL^JI (_5jJsjj SjUJI i^J.A? 

. L$a I Ja I ^i L$a Ljo-U 

^j. io J I Cj Lfl I j^)-o t — ^%-J I <1. i If. — ^-t.ij^-o ^jac. jj-J I b^s^auj Li I 

1*1^ Lu-oj I ^ lJ ^ I J l^i I <afLo V I 4 _ < j-® n 3 ^ I 

^JLo. <p U*tJ I L)j^ 6 j Lu-uJ I j pIaJIj ^IjjJI J&jil (Jljlic.lj p IjTu.oV 1 
^a Li I (J ja t <J lj.j.^.1 1 jj Ll^j <i LLJ <i ^ Ij-Juj <G L^ jJjxxaj jj I J 

49 (JJi < IjULjj <b_OJjil CjLc.Lta.tJ I CjIj^Lj ^j£- L^J ^ijJJ IjjL^ <Lx^.jil I £■ I JJ^U 
^J^Ll^L ^ I I •— >4^ < <_jV^J I (Jj&I ^j\£- jjoJiLo ^Ll^j LLixl I (J_aV jj j_o_o 

oJj^ CjLcJu (Jjkljill dijj j-oo-uia L^i Ju ‘jf- L^lC- I j-jjkifl L^ijjLaaj 

o j. ^ 

Uli . Lf^-j j ^ ^Sj L ^ Lgj csj^j L^j l ^ I Jji*J I 

.<-0x1)1 ^ li_i| jxaoj ^.j-oxJ I ^Lj_oj <.o<t^l I ^i-U < ij-o 

L Cj J-l I jILiaxo) I <-^ji 1^ I JaLuu-JI j^j-)^5 I j|^-J I Lli 

^] S>=»^l ^ ^ Jj2i oj^=j 




V£ .rr :oA i^yi ij^ jt:i < 48 » 
:d»j l49) 


0 lU 0 p J. 

‘ a ^ jI 0-** Jl9^ tA Jt^ 0*- ^ l tr“ 0*- J^ 1 

t-_Sj-uj|j Jj^jJI 4.aKj Jjx.^.S.aI I ^OLaI I j Jj.xA\.aI I £cJloI I j JjJ>o>oJI (JJiil LjIj 
^jxu jlioJI £-xSj i^jl^il 4.x oJAa jl-kLJ I 6 jJj£. < Jj J.^k-o 6 jj Ij Jj^jo 6j.xa 

•p^b j I jx-u V I J J-^-O ^Kl I « ^1 


Iji-oV Ij P IjP-J I ^J-u I I J 

? 

p^La£.V lj jj-oilatil jx>uj 

? 0 J> ? 

p LqaJ I jjsui I La 

% 

pLuJI 6 J . v . i v V j-o ^j>i_u 
p LxJuj Lo (JjiAj j LvA.aI I j>4 


[>b] 

* ~ c- * ' 

p Lo-x <xl Ij ixAljV I I 

* $ 

p LfJ I j (JUjaJ I j.^o.1 1 
^Ij jl£iVl o-o I Lo Ijl 

iSA&j cSj-'e 3>° os^ ^ 

Lj_lS ^ l5L^ V Ij v, iij x^jJ I 4J 


IS jjJ I I 4 ' U-s. 


t ■> 1 4-JjV I i—SjbuoJ I j-o 4_i Of Lt Loj 4. v.KI I 6 j^xVJ I <ijJa_ai I Qi*.ax 1 1 Loij 

^_i jj» J I -v < I 4.11 I jl jl Loi ! oJ Lis . L^— lxJLi j£. 4_ij*_o l.^.x a ji 4. X^s JJ ^_S >0"*k J.x^a 
(^jU ■ ^ . ViaI I S j±*-u (= L^_J I jt>kj lA-A; ub jl^iilj 

Jj I :<1 JLSi] . 1.*. iai rj oj jlj 1 .j. iK.p <uULa <uL p liLi <uLac. 3 ** J-oV ^ 

jj JJ ii Li . W ^ oj-uJ 52 [<jja 1 I Jji-o ^ ijXo ojS <Ujc (j^jl ^ 

jxiixuj Lfrj jj L^-a v jxuG LAj^JaLfl dLxSj (J.xaS.*v jLL^GL_uI 

. JL^-oil jjj_uj ^]j JL^-o ^_i jxGVI ^jU If* jj 1.~va.v 

OlkLpp ,^J>a ^ Loj 3^^ LA :l_.H*JI Jlii 


u 


.J^VI > J=ipp : [ ] l50) 

.iJV! l 51 » 
■ Jj ^ pjy 1 :[ ] t52) 


III I ^LlATuV I jJfc I JJfcj KJ I die. 4 -lie j.^ Ja-u. i lQ <3*.j LuJ I ^ji I : <J J L44 

L » ) L^»J I ^_s^c. Lj o jjLi 3 ^-^ ^iljlij j-oV I ^jlia .^iLLaJL ^LuliVlj 

:Jli <pldill <LL^.j £-&-*->■> Lodta.Q j.^ .lX 1 1 <lo 53 j^-cJL <IxjJuJ J^lll <_j 

J» ^ 

^iajJa 3 1-a^k.l I J^J I ^ Lo ^ > .V4xViJt.^ ^J| jlkill Sljj (_£dil IdA Lo 

5i ?o? 

^*^L<-<a| 54 ^J_qjuj <JLlL (J_jJ_» (JjlL ^jjaJ I j ^jLj J.j.U .1 1 IfLJofl 

6 jl.^tVij ^-<uJ ^ ^ujI Loj LcLlol VI pljjJlj LcLujI VI 55 jjj^JI ^jUj <JL 
dll Lo : <_i Jt.l I CjLSjIj-cu i_4l^k u jJ I >_j 1.^ <Qc ^_cu-eaj Lao 

S‘ l. g . la^ JudJj LfaL-^jl jim Vj LfiAxi LpLIacI ^ jJ^uj 

^-oLx^j Jlii <JdJ 3 ^ jjjuaJL j-o I j o-uU <-xi | ^iLc.ji 
^J 57 ^JJajj dL<i.4*n ^Ju^jju ^jlu j_oV I Jjj d4j dLuL*_o <l4jjua ^jC. ^ILajI 56 dLuLua 
dlj^Ja ^ J^lj JjLSlII die. dllo ^d^jl <dll jjj :oidfl . dLxuuxi ^JLo j 4^j3 

^^JLufcjj ^j. udid^. ^ic.Jjl <6jJfcLla SjjL-ca db^ 3-° Li La (J^LuJI ^Ic 

f „ ' * t 

^.lljaj dLi | ^JLo ^AiSjj l^-AXi-oJ ‘GIajj Lo jjj^ I I 4 J * SjC. I <4^4-^. < ^j. u4 

.<J] ^iLc.J I j| ^lljJu <_xl | ^JLo <Axajj 3-»di 3 ^ djj-<- A-k I 4 -JJ dLlf. dLl^.uV) I I jj 

dLlj J jj < 6 I 3^ 3'^^ ^ j-4 j 6 dLo-o <JLxa j < tl-uj 3 1 ^-°- uu 

6 ji Luc. J <G lAx-^ ^j. £ ^ l.^.x^-5 cu Lc. J <G I jj I j do. I jJ I 

^au^jJ I 3*^ ^ £-<u^. Ij I IfLil I ^3jj LkTuV I l\\]n j ^ LuliV I 

+ * * 9 ' 

L 2 j^> JxiUJI Jjj iaSL^J j^jJI <1 i3j jVI 

J> % X * 

3j^J il&J*- Oti 


■ j*ill :olU,jU, « 53 > 
.JLG :^li (54 » 
.d^bu^ :JtJ V <55 > 
. j^JI :cJ^ .j^La ."ja^ L < 56 > 
.^yJki :cJU ,_,U, < 57 > 


\r 


JaS <ij£.| p^LLoI I j CjJ^J <-oJji_o ^Jj £■ jjj 4-d I ^j_o Jau nl LojAJli 

L :q lia ^.uL^ii <a^JVI <1 o *qj! I cJJ L-u-oi lj <i ^ j I ^ d I J-txU Udl3 

o^i-Vl^ • (^j-al 4-d£ die. .K'll ^lmslu ijlii S^JuL-al ^iil 11 a Lo 

*1 _ , & 

Laj ^ jjd!L_tta L^j Luj Liid I I jL-u^ J.4a.d I o j-a£. ji p laid L I j Li Jild I ^jdali 

. <i j l^£. L^LLoj <ij LLJ L^-iS Jj^d I ^ Jj I 


[J-»j] 


t^lxJI cAjJ tr^- 0 

lid 1 li j j L i 

^lUi ^ J ^ 


^_lLu Q^d L Ij 

JjG L ^JujLua 

J)LSJI JS 

LS^J <J\ 

j)L»JI Jjc. <jl j 

ooLi j-o jlii Li 

jljVlj ^UVI ^ 

jliixxto ^vS.^. 

^_il_Ju 4 v ■ m ' <JiL_Ju 

0-° C£>^ J-*- 0 ^ 

^JiL-ui <j La 

^juj oj^ ,j| jSjjli 

60 Jp 1.4^1 

o £ 

cJj^ ^J^LSj O-o 

jL=JI aijU .3 jz 

o 5S 

l^‘,J ji v j ^ lo 1 

<j Lo jJ 1 cJuij L-^J 

Lu ^j_o cjLJLL 

# 

JjL ^54 ~d 1 ^i <d Lo 

* 

^^ixJ 1 J jil 1 

^Lik^al 1 jJsj 

^Ll^l ^jJI jJsj 

Jjljjj 6 \jj Jjjj 

^Lj£. ^lolilj 


.oLiil :J^VI J, (58 > 

-.15 '5^ ... .".Iq'Qj :cJL=>. <jLa. 
.oUai^ ... oLi^j :cJLa. ,_,U. (60) 
OJ :olU .J <1 V < 61 > 


\t 


£jjji 

^jL_aJ I Jjl^ala 

62 ,jjll Lilj 


J£ LS -^uu 

J b J^ ^ b 1 j 

? 0 x x 

^LiLcU I jU 

Ijk CjJJ -^2 Ijlj 
^jlauJI ^Jac.1 IjLa 


dJLJI v li*JI U*L 


:Jli <ui^l jlaJ I ^j-o Loj I <G J$J Lo c-iIJLaJI £_oo_u Lola 

Op JO 0 p 0 J 

id-tl.-M) ( j£. Lil t_j jC. Ij dlj Lu J-La : <J cUm <A 3 U-uJ Lo CiJ^-ia I J dc. J I LoJ^ 

iJLSj v^jLLaj <L^. L-w . \ Jy<Lj.SiJ v_jGLaJI jJj_uu jjJ&U 

[J-K] 

j-flj V I LLoi I v_j UjlI I Li I 

<Lc&s± e_u I j_o ^lc j>a^ I joaq I 

6 Jj^-j Jjjj ^_o L_uJ I 4 ,xA^ Li I 

X J> p 

<xA ia cJjLo Lj l j 

L^-j j-uL I4I Lo >_ dk ll 

0 J. 

1 ^^^ jj-jl 

<Jj. 1*4.0 ojj j I jLi 

<Loj>i_uLo 6 j_oli O JJU I jjj 
^j<LL <Cj-U-> Ijj jj>oVI LjLS 
I j| La jju.u I j ^jUjI j-i-uLs 


* p j 

0 - x<L ^ - l L$ 

j-lol igjc-j LGjJI SjjjJI 
Jj^jJI j£.Jl Llj 

£-lo Ij P Llai 1 <> 

p o p 

£jj^l P l$JI ^jui ^Gl 

^.uxCu LS -1*JI t_J2 IgJ JjSJ 

£AxJ£a LfjU.jl J-o ji^lllj 


x p 0 

t^ 1 jl tAW <A 

u- p p >> 

^.LWi <1 aVI jL^i c.A > Lc. 
cGlfLs «->Li*JI cAu ‘i jjl ^jjJlII ^.j JJi_o Lilj ^jjSLil ulj-o ^j-o <_uj_o Jjl ^aJ 




-J^l :^L- - ^1 :cJU 4J U <LS J < 62 ) 


6 jj-txJ I oils jILoLa <L_uiil <_i_uAu <j| <-iIjaII ^jj^ajj 

* * - 

6 *1x1 v £-oLxJ I jVi nV I ^J£. (£3 " ^ 1 1 La 6^J^-i-ui Li 6^J^o_u * " « 6 Ll 

jj I jj Lj IjTu.uV I j^a^a Lola < ^a 111 I j j LAJ I 6 Lx^. L^j LJ I j ^Ja*_cJ I 

* * ^ ^ e 

^Aa! I j I'm.uaI I ^J Ijjj < LaI I j p IaJ I jj-*3 LIa! I j-oaa I j£-V L Loa>u V I 

-- ^ ' 0? 

1*11 r\ 1 1 < i^l i__aJ Li ^ ^ ‘ * 1 1 I < * 1 1 ^ 1 Lt * jflii n lj ^AaaJ I ^ L ■ iitt I cj-xjj ja'i ■ ■ lj 

£-o Lxj dlli I J ^A jJAa I (j I iS-All I Luli a v Lvl I p I jj ^ I jj ^ . JJaJ I dLUJ L j I J j 
jJaxI I <J .„i~-k.i jj-o-o JAxi I <J i^x^.i ^j-o C j jaaj j-liii I L5^° LoJa ‘ ^ ^ 

^_a CujLc cJaj i i i & 1^-oJ Ij iqxu KJ 1 ^jJ-i jlj-iVI Ci-a-i_uAj >_i A I J-aJ I ' 1 11 J 

:S j^l^loII ^ I ,3-° CxuLc Cilflj I 6 jj-AaJ I I j_o jl I :<_ax^-qJI ^ I I 

JSLftl Ij-ajJI :6 jjAa 1 I Q I JjV I (j-o CxiiLc ^j-ai cJaj ISj^a-lxuJI CjLoLaqJ I I j_o jJ I 

■a ? 55 

La jjJ I <Aj-U-oJ I cxuLc. ja ciVsj <Jjj>a Jl^.xVi. J <JjJLo i_J-L.i <— aLu<3 £• Ija ISj^j-oJI 

* p « 0 

. J j LuJ I cJ-A j tj j LlJ I p. u i All I jj£. LaIjlI I <-ujaJ I L^.bi^kj 

^XX^JUJ p^LajJ I <£.Loja (_£ J^A I ijjj-i-i^JI <-iJjl ^A j-iA_cJlj Jjj^J I ^Jc. LiLfl 

L (_£J-u-^J jl^Al dlj-uu Ijju-AiA p^LAaJI ^j-a <_j L^ xr. 

^j^aII ^fsj-uj ^A CjjAjj JA Cul^ LoJj IjjajAU i t J <b 

! ^jajla! I 3^ ^ I J-4 : I jJ La < jJ I I ^j-o jj>i-ea J La^- L^-iA J.A^a.^kj 

^lc jli Vj jL L J^JI jl Ij^Jc jJj 

Ijl^ , \Q A. ^ \ | 1 ^ I l-V tJ J I L < l **‘l 1 I <1 ' ^ I l ''l \ A Q < I I ■ < i < l i 1^ 1 | ^ If 4 Q l A i I ijs ^ 1 I 

^ ^ , & 

jjjj ^jaIL Ij-o^aa ^jaIL ^jaII aIt. < Cu v 1 Ij ^jliA.JiJ I ^JjJLoj ^jJL 

* * t Q * 

juJ Lr ijli ICiij LC ^ . t^i ‘f^- 0^ ^ 

* '.''If. f. 

<J^Lai <lU I jj La I^Ax^Vi Lqj jA l^j I j. u ix\ Lo_o Lj I j ^A^.i I I I 

^jaII <ajL_uJ ^j£. ^j£. ^xj <^xjaJL ^JL. 64 ^j5La_o [ 63 jJlj j|] Lj|j ^jaII ^a 


.dllj j| + 


:^li - jy* L, -jL (63) 

. i_aj i :jjjj L 


n 


Lti jjVl JaLlj tji <ji£ < -°^ J^b <j^ j4^ 

0 

-“ - * ‘ *. 1 1 I t *. 1 1 


0 

, l*o ,aJ ,c jJI /<c$DI 




I <_U jit I 4 \ 


^j£- v_jjJ u Ulxll O-oH <LoLLo ^jLu ^k. ^llj 4-0^^ ^j-o ^_j11aJI £^jl Lola 

Ja-i-uujJI ^.LLaiL ^jjuoiL (J I jLo <v_jjjLo Ilk Ill :cJU < LaJ^. 6jJU 

. (_£ -Ll Loj I Jj-o jjJ I ^A4V'i\ I < K i->-o.l I j^-ii I v_4 u. 1 1 ^lc 


jjlio ^ i 66 c5 lll 111! 

j> ; o; 

jj j-cu-o La v_jLj La^c. 

? 

_\jy ' ^ C a I | £)^_1_U ^ Va A i 

* ^ 

jjj-o-o LiLI L^lLa^c. 

^ « ■" 

j> j> 5 

^j- 0 ^.UkLa 


[j-ol^] 
0^ ^ 65 ^ I bli 

J> J> * V ' * 

Lib j v-Ijjju k Ilk 

# ■" 

^Lla L I Lo 

°" p'd 5i ^ 

I^j-i_u I 4_i L&^ I 

0 

l_uIj-o Lr lc 


j^=J I ijj I I ->j-a=J I ^ 

^jijj dULoJI * j L kxJ I lljjJI <ljJa_cJ I ^L LakJI < nil I 111 LuJ^. 

IL. /\l I ji^il I (J * q I <■ a ^ \t 1^ <jLoVI (J^ ^ a I U 1 1 j ^5-bJ I j • k 111 dlJLJI I 


bltf.1 J^-fl ^JLc. ^ I ^j_o <(_£j-il I Lo J^ljl ^-LlII k j£- I Vj 4lU 

I I ^J^LxAj ^^-o-ual! b 'jG- ^1 Lo LLxL_u jj^l-o .a.1 1 

<11^. ,J^j <<bu-ui I ^j>o (_^jk. LJ <Jt>oV I <4 1.^.1 1 111 i ^-o.l*l ^i| (Jl_i_oV Ij 
jj.x^.1 1 ^a Cu < i. Ij 6jj-i-<a (J-o^ < L^-a_u^j Lo |j L^ .A\yt.*b Lo| L^.a ojjJ 

^ j. ^ j. j. j> 

■ "’ 1 < 1 tj) ^ 1 ^ ~N- V I £C_A_0 1^ 4-oJ Ls_l ‘ 1 1 ‘ ^ ^L^IaJ I i l ib I I O-i-A^ 6 JI^JUU < Loj) 1 3> o 1 1 


.(_^jJI <<i'll jjL_u J-i-taV I lj^ 

.(_^jJI :^in'H jjL_u J-i-taV I ^3 lj^ 


w 


I J^aQ i u < jlJ Vj dljJ-o < xi LL=a 67 4.L^a Vj <-1 ^ 3^1 ^xJ j.^JA.1 V <<Lo^Lxa 

* 0 t f. * 0 * ' 

cjJuI jA Ij^-s I ( jjJL2k_o 3^J-?* 3- ii'4^.. J I 3^-1 >— <-JAc Jjlll 

* O f, 

3 La ““ <> o>lj <> 


dLILJI v l >11 Juki. 


^*\ I |^J t Q \^t | I j-cuV I 6 LL-a J-oL^j J5La Li :(JIAj ^_jIjaJI ^.lAA 


°j^ iji , L> u -5 j - ui ^b ^ <>Ls £>l ' -' ■ y ,i j 

v )^x^*a. \ < u I ^-OA^ 3 15s. i \ ,V I I La I i ^ j) i ■ . ~v 1 1 Lc. ^x lA ^a-o^ ^x^a-u^I I 

<_£ JI jaxaJI La I <£- LisJlj jjl j.4x^a ^JLc. «LLJj-J I L I j j* Lji I j ^ LxxaxoJ I LlA <JLIuiV I 

jlj ^LafcJ <AlAjjV <1 a I jlj aj£. Jj JalJ I J ji Llj s L»a jiia^AiA 


^AaLja LjLA <tj jV Ij JaV I <a I Ja JaUa (JjA ^xi CjJax.j Jo <<Llj£.V 4 aa Lib j 

Lj'j (>*' jJjl Jj*- >j I >| <>JI j^LS^- £->J (All I >JI 

, | p .• * p 

JJ.I 3-° JLl ^^-Ll J-° <<aLc Caa-uaJj <aUI Ll < 69 c5 4lil jj-o £tJo L ^jJxujI 

3^J I ^aLcj t^jAJuJI 3 ^-^ LAi,^ L I j 3 .^- ^ L <L^UaJ I Li < JJi 3- 0 JJ ^ a u < iaj 

^Ic. i J.U 1 3^-°j JU 1 6jjA-<a Ll i ca i iU ^Jj ^aIjLj cLiiA <Gj.xA"x ^J| 

k_)LSjJI 3 I La^ 3^^ ^ 3^^JI Ll < (_^JAx < xaI L I^LjjV I ^r.xx^a 

" J. ^ >> 

jJ I ^-xxls < jjbLkll <Jj j^VI Li j 3jV I j-4 3 >«lj V (_£>H I 3a LJI 

X< ^ tf - p 

"£ # ^ ^ ^ tf 

.6J AjV ^AjLuj <Ajil lj|j 6 JaAJ ^jJL <Lufclj <JLaj lj| <LcJc. 


I4 .a\~x. i L^a^axVi oa-A^j I4 .ac. j ^^j-L 3>x^ ji I (Ja*J I ja 3-°-° < LaLL o-oLS 
1^ L L 3 L j ^aL j Lx-4 p LaJ I 3 a-o 2 x <lL. (^^Ac. I jJlLxj p L 4 .1 1 ^aaS ^a I j-L LA 


N j I “s. ^ ‘ w I ..,1 1 |V a ^ C 

■jl- (68) 

.LLLAI iliuo ‘Jj (69) 


u 


<u IjiL L ^ jU-j oji<^ 

p „ '*' * *' 0 

ls^ 0-“^ pUUI JjsI (_ji jL lj| 70 I J.\* < fc^k I 

<!> j. * * % p || '0 > ^ 0' M p 

Jjjj ^JLl Li ^1 jij 71 jjj^j <Ljj ^i LM^li 

i * 

. Lc. I LoS ^u-ui I ^Iju j_o 


[J-°->] 


72 ,jj U* L 0 -* <u ^ 


jjlii <iU. 

■* 

^Ja-u-J 1 jh- J 1 Lli 

^Lu LJ ^iJLk 

ji^oV 1 L U^J 

^JLlJ 1 j^ili 

<jL°J Lli 

^jLajJI ^Ijil (JlLo 

^IjaJI j-o Uij 

J)L*J 1 JjC L-iLa. 

iSj IP ^ L 

^Lcj LJ LuLL 

Si >> p 

Lo jJ 1 j LaJ 


LuJ 1 Lc, j Li 

* | 

1 -i 1 Ji£ 

jLjl 73 jjli^ ju> 

li^. Lr LJI j^i 

^LVI i Uij 

74 ^iljLJI liLfl 

1.^. J 1 L_u Li 

» p 
f’Ll Lij 

^jLJj ^.IAc. 1 <IjLlL 

jvlf- 1 <ulc. 

Jj LiaJ 1 jj-i-^LLJI 

^ is? f 1 ^ 

jLu-J 1 c_ijLk 

^_J Li ^ ' A l i 1 I V 


\ • A :YT Sj^ (70) 

No :T. j.jjJI (71 > 

jjJ^j Lj Jj-taV I Lj "" 'I I * 77 * 

.olii^ :cJU ,jU. (73 > 
.^LcJI :cJl~ ,^li ,jU. ..u^ L (74 > 


N“\ 


jllcu jJ 5 

^jl » Ul I _llc. 75 cu£ 
bud I Jl^J I j 
jlaj buo 

3^. 3^i bs- 11 ^ 


t^>j hA? cJ^b 
fo^ 1 

6 J.-d lj blj 
76 J=JI <> Ljj^J ^ 
^jjJU £“ VLo Jio 


^■KJ I i^j L_u_s V I 1^^ V I O Lfl-o I O Lo LLo ciil ■ ■- ^ J) I 4s Lluj ^\i/i Ls I J^_3 

Jabdl L^.j-Q o^-»La 77 ^J5d I ^.x < L^k.1 1 j I j I j (JjV I (J^jJ I j 

7 ^ • 7 ® LxLcj I ^ 1 1 m t a ^ l<* ^v^l.i « f.t 1 ^ < i i ni ' ^ I ~v < i iJ I U 1 1 


•Jh ^ (75) 

.j^JI :oJU. <^jli <jU. .Jj (76) 
. a ■ ■ ■ *•■. 1 1 ^ (■ L4J I ^ Ja^ A **>■ a 1 1 ^jJ-l I J ^Jc. V I a lot I ^ :pJ I **>. ■ j^La ,JU < 77 > 

<111 ta^jj a.^ « I f ^^LcuJIj in'll <LiAj ^a * 7 ^ 
^ « ■ " 1 1 ijj-<al ^j-a jJj I 4 1 ..a >1 «Lu^ Ijjj^ I ««!■■■" a I , , 1 ^ ‘lib _Ui =>-a ^ 1 1 + : ,U^-i u * 7 ^ 

. 41 I < 1 U. q-v d Ua 1 l£j 

L^jLsLo L^-jIjJS ( i^jilaL^JLjj) 411 ‘Laaj ^jjl I ^ ‘ > a Ja^, ^a Q-u-a _la.:^-a _\-a.T^. I j >aal I L^Jilc. + 

.(_£ji ,z.\.~>.j.s-i.k J_>^aV I LfJ 

.(_^jj&ljJI JjjjJI jJj ^ ' . ~~. 1 1 ,l-i.~^ i 1-^.j-a 4^.414 1 4-4 in'll ^Jc. 4- :jjjj Lj 
Jjja a-^ I <_L=»_i_ t aj 41 (j ' ' "1 1 j4Lik -La.-^.-a LjJjj-u S^A u-il l^g J^loILJI i_ij 41 -UiaJ lj ' "■ I a*\ + !jL^ 
,j I-U-i.Vj Jjjj.iof, £- J - u lj 4 j Li-<J I I i> J ft'ia n <_2»_i_uj ^jxt <1 ~4 , nil I 6 JxIaA ^ l_^4l I J_a_5J 6 _1^_J 41 -La.-^.! I j 

411 I ~" 1 1 1 -Aj ^j-al ^j^al.-.j-aJ I ^ ' a -a I j jAS ±- 1 111 a ' ~-j I «alr 411 1 n*^ I 4 LaJI-i.uJJ S j.<"jf a a. 4-uj a j*\ a! I 

^JLsJI cL .1 Lll I JJLJI > i"il I jiaall a > a Ij i I /jj 411 j_ic. 4 1 a -> ^JL*j 411 ^J| j >aal I <lC\^ + :jl_^ 

j^a I "If 41 1 jLc.1 ( ^-'S>..>Sl 1 I 4^^-* ■" ^1 1 ,^41 ^4^4 1 >— 4i.a jj^I^II 

41 J-ajJ 4 (875 = ) »_>^ — j & JjLuJI Jjl lA a^ J ^ i Vi I j I ^3 ^jaaIxjj4 ‘Lj I \ a a a^g 

<_i^_i_ta ^ 4 1 ^ If j J a a [j J ' ■ ' ■ ^ If d a^ I ■ 1 1 ^ <Lj I jl .-^ d a ' a ji ..a ^ <Lj ^c. ^ 41 1 J a -s. » 4 1 ■ ■■ ^1 1 . -» a \ -j- ; ^t_j La 

. I Jj I ^ 1 1 1 i_g 


^ j-~ ."l I 


aj ^"*11 jL^uVI 6 ^_3 I J Li d_aj) i ijj-al I d^^ I ' a 1 1 4Li-u^JI > 


^jjO ^ I j4i I J^a Ijj J 4J I ‘La.^.j ^_j^xl I 0->4 I ^imj £t_i_Jull 4u Lixj^l I ‘La_ijV I jjjJal Ij 4u L-u-> V I 

p LsujV I j Lfj I4I1 Li£ 


s-r*JL-Jth 

ji^y 

*jl\s 

i yi)Jy>> jp3 , /M>.|rA/ 

>^yr ‘j^lrpkr^^ic^ 

•SjJkySjt, \^,S/f_b 

JjVA jWW 
Ori>>> . -»VU, j*»J' 

JUl/- > ,s^k>f>5 *<' 

>j£*-i'i 'lib’ 

r >y 

Ju,li ;' .1- Tilv/I^ '-' 


The Universal Tree and the Four Birds, one of Ibn 'Arabi’s early works, is 
a dazzling blend of poetry and rhymed prose, encompassing a number of 
themes that were of perennial concern to the Shaykh al-Akbar. Based on 
the mystical framework of the ascent, the stages of the journey to union 
with the Real are described in an intriguingly enigmatic way. Beginning 
with a dizzying series of poems that explain the existential fluctuation of 
the human heart, the narrator goes on to describe his meeting with his 
Essential Self in a place outside of space and time. He then finds himself 
in a garden with the Universal Tree and four delightful birds: an Eagle, a 
Ringdove, a fabulous Anqa’, and a Jet-Black Crow. Each in turn regales 
the author with a tale of its origins and essential characteristics, but only 
at the end are their true natures revealed. 

The elegant translation is complemented by Angela Jaffr ay’s illumi- 
nating commentary on key elements in the text and extensive notes, and 
a Foreword by Rafi Zabor. The Arabic text, critically edited from the 
best manuscripts by Denis Gril, is also included. 



^«4v 

ANQA 

PUBLISHING 


ISBN 0-9534513-9-9 




9 " 780953 "451 395 


Printed in the USA 



www.ibn-arabi.com 

publishing@anqa.co.uk 



