
TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION 


This volume contains a translation of the Middle (or Second) Fifty 
Discourses of the Majjhima-Nikaya. They are arranged, as are the 
First Fifty and the last Fifty (-two), in five Divisions ( vagga ) of ten 
Discourses each. But the assemblage of Discourses in the different 
Divisions and the naming of the Divisions are less complicated here 
than in either of the other Sections. For the assemblage and the 
naming are based in a concrete and factual way on five of the main 
segments of the population of the day. The Discourses that each 
Division contains therefore do not depend for their grouping on 
whether they go in pairs or are similes, for there are only two pairs 
(Nos. 63, 64 and 77, 79 1 ) and only one upama-Discoui&e ; nor are they 
collected according to the apparently more arbitrary plan of naming 
a Division after the Discourse placed first in it and then including the 
remaining nine Discourses for reasons that may be more or less clear 
or obscure to us. On the contrary, the Discourses here are referred 
to various groups of persons who went to make up a major part of 
the contemporary life of India: Householders, Monks, Wanderers, 
Royalty and Brahmans, all of deep interest to the Buddha’s followers* 
By and large, but with exceptions, the ten Discourses assigned to 
each of the five Divisions of the Middle Fifty logically belong not 
only together but also to the Divisions in which they are placed, 
since in some manner, actual or narrative, each Division throughout 
contains material appropriate to its title. 

No assessment could be complete however unless an investigation 
were made of material that might have been contained in these 
Divisions but which in fact occurs elsewhere. For example, are 
there Discourses to, for or about wanderers or royalty in some Other 
Divisions than those Called by either of these names ? If the 
question is: are there other Discourses to, for or about monks, the 
answer is quite definitely and naturally in the affirmative. Even if 
some of these may lack the Vinaya flavour characteristic of a 
number of Discourses in the Monks’ Division, monks nevertheless 
remain, both when carrying out the Vinaya rules and regulations, and 

1 On these (the Rahulovada Suttas and the Vacchagotta Suttas) see M.L.S, 
i, Intr. p. xiii. 




X 


Translator's Introduction 


when practising such other parts of the training as meditation, a 
chief centre of interest all through the Pitakas. 

Space does not permit in this Introduction of making any such 
assessment of other Majjkima Discourses that might have been 
placed among the Middle Fifty or of the reasons why they have not 
been so placed. It would have been ideal if each Division could 
have been furnished with its own foreword as is nearly every 
Discourse in The Dialogues of the Buddha} Nor is there Space to 
tabulate the names of places where Discourses are said to have been 
given, the names of those who gave them, or the names of those to 
whom they were spoken. Nor is it possible to discriminate between 
Discourses spontaneously given, those prompted by a statement that 
may have seemed shallow or untrue, those given in response to a 
question or an invitation to speak on a certain topic, or those that 
begin with Gotama or one of his disciples asking a question and then 
proceeding to develop some theme. As things are, the Majjhima 
is too long and its “ rich variety ” too great. This Introduction can 
therefore aim at being no more than a general and much compressed 
survey of a few out of the many striking situations, words and 
phrases recorded in these fifty Discourses which, stemming from 
India, “ the very mother of religions,” still shine and glow with 
vitality. 

In the Division on Householders (Nos. 51-60), the first in this 
volume, all the Discourses except two (Nos. 57, 58) are either in 
whole or in part addressed to householders or are prompted by some 
remark or question attributed to a householder, gahapati . Three 
bear the names of householders in their titles (Nos. 54, 55, 56) and one 
(No. 52) that of a householder’s town, although the parallel version at 
A. v. 342 is called after the man himself. One Discourse is named 
after a wanderer (No. 51) ; and the one named after a canine ascetic 
(No. 57) has no more to do with householders than has No. 58 which 
is named after a prince. In this Division no special charter for 
householders is found as in the Sigalovada&uManta of the Digha. 
Dhamma is presented to them, neither curtailed nor adapted to their 
life in the world, nor made easier for them to undertake and practise 
than it is for monks (see especially Stas. Nos. 52, 53, 54). Nor can 
one say that the various leading topics occur here and nowhere else, 
since exhortations on the moral habits, sense-pleasures, feelings and 

1 Sacred Books of the Buddhists, vols. II, III, IV, translated by T. W. and 
C. A. F. Rhys Davids. 



Translator's Introduction 


xi 


the four types of “ tormentors ” do in fact appear in other parts of 
the Nikayas. For example, even the classification of the feelings by 
groups of increasing numbers, from 2 to 108 (Sta. No. 59) is also 
found at S. iv. 231f. Or again, Sta. No. 53, in which a precise 
meaning is ascribed to the compound vijjd-cararia-sampanna, has 
affinities with the AmbaUha - and the Sdmannaphala-suttantas } 

This compound, which may be rendered “ possessed of knowledge 
and (right) conduct ” (or, practice), is not only used as one of the 
many, and so far uncollected, epithets of the Buddha; it also stands 
for an achievement an ariyan disciple can win by strict training and 
self-control. The Sekha-sutta (No. 53) assigns a very definite 
connotation both to carana and vijjd, as to a lesser extent does the 
Ambattha-suttanta, according to which carana consists of fifteen 
factors, as noted briefly at A A. iii. 151, SA. i. 217, and more fully at 
SA. i. 219: possession of moral habit ( silasampanna ), guarding the 
doors of the senses, moderation in eating, intentness on vigilance or 
wakefulness, possession of the seven excellent things, acquirement at 
will and without trouble or difficulty of the four jhdna which are of 
the purest (or, highest) mentality and are abidings in ease here and 
now, diUhadhammasukhavihdra . And vijjd , knowledge, is broken up 
into and specified as three kinds or branches represented by the verbs 
anussarati , pajdndti and abhijdndti . 2 

Two points here call for comment: (1) the term ditthadhamma- 
sukhavihdra , which I have translated as “ abiding in ease here and 
now,” and which has been most variously rendered by English 
translators, is here as elsewhere applied solely to the four jhdna and to 
nothing but the jhdna . It is an appellation of these meditative 
states and of these only. 

(2) The description of the ariyan disciple who is possessed of moral 
habit, silasampanna , shows him as one who is “ moral ” in more 
senses than that of observing the silos . But the opening word of 
this description, silavant , is doubtless intended to refer to this first 
and fundamentally necessary stage in the whole training. While the 
Sanmnnaplialasuttanta , §§43-62, says of the mastery of each of the 
major, middle and minor sila that, in regard to the ariyan disciple 
“ it is so of him in regard to moral habit,” idam pi' ssa hoti silasmirh , 
the SekhasuUa says of the mastery of each of the fifteen factors of 
carana , of which only the first is possession of moral habit but on a 
scale more expanded than is usual, that “ this is so of him in regard 


1 D. Stas. Nos. 3 and 2 respectively. 


3 See PED. s.v. vijjd . 



xii Translator’s Introduction 

to conduct,” idem pi ’ ssa hoti caranasmim. The Sdmannaphala Sta. 
therefore appears to supply something lacking in the SeJcha, some- 
thing perhaps already known and not necessary to repeat; but the 
Sekha-sutta , on the other hand, makes an advance over the Sdmanna- 
phala in that, having almost certainly assumed idam pi 9 ssa hoti 
silasmim, it takes the ariyan disciple not only where idam pi ’ ssa hoti 
caramsmim but also where, having successfully broken through the 
egg-shell of ignorance, idam pi 7 SM JtOti mjjdya , “ this is so of him in 
regard to knowledge.” By vijjd the threefold knowledge is meant: 
recollection of former habitations; comprehension that it is in 
accordance with kamma that beings, beheld with the purified dew- 
vision, pass hence and come to be elsewhere; and realisation that by 
the destruction of the dsavd the mind is freed. 1 It is by the ariyan 
disciple’s recollection, comprehension and realisation (in these 
senses) that “ it is so of him in regard to knowledge.” 

Jains are particularly mentioned in Stas. Nos. 56 and 58. In the 
long Updli-sutta (No. 56) the householder of this name, who earlier 
had been a Jain adherent and supporter, became so much convinced 
by the arguments he heard the “ recluse Gotama ” put forward that 
three times he asked to become an updsaka i a lay-devotee, and thus 
more closely knit to the fourfold community. On each occasion he 
was answered by the Lord exactly as was General Slha 2 who had also 
begun as a follower of the Jains. This curious parallelism of 
question and answer which I find only on these two occasions inclines 
one to ask whether there may not be here some special formula in use 
now and again for accepting Jains, or Jains of a particular standing 
— “ well-known men ” perhaps. For, on the other hand, Vappa the 
Sakyan who had also been a disciple of the Jains appears to have 
become a lay-devotee simply by uttering the usual formula 3 once 
only, as was the general custom in force no matter from what 
stratum of society a man or woman came wanting to join the Buddha’s 
community. Upali’s set of verses with which this Sutta concludes, 
all in eulogy of “ this Lord whose disciple am I,” is remarkable for 
the variety of its epithets, each pointing to some decisive quality or 
attainment of this “ recluse, a human being, in his last body, a man.” 

A Division on Monks (Nos. 61-70) was no doubt necessary to give 
the right balance to the social picture evoked by the titles of the four 
other Divisions of the Middle Fifty. Otherwise, and considering the 


1 See below, p. 24. 


* Vin, i. 236 f.; A. iv. 185. 


* A. ii. 199-200. 



Translator's Introduction xiii 

multitude of Discourses throughout the M . that are addressed not 
only to monks but specially to them, why is there a Division on 
Monks at all ? Or why, to form the Division, were these particular 
ten Discourses selected ? It is true that at least four of them 
(Nos, 65, 66, 67, 70) contain a Vinaya element, but so do others for 
example No. 82 (and 104). All the Discourses in this Division are 
concerned with monks, and all the monks referred to were already 
ordained. This distinguishes them from Stas. Nos. 82 and 86, the 
former of which tells the story of the entry into the Order of monks 
of Ratthapala the young man of family, and the latter that of 
Angulimala the bandit. These two Discourses are respectively 
named after them. Except for these and six Discourses in the 
Division on Monks (Nos. 61-65 and No. 69) none other in the 
Middle Fifty takes a monk’s name for its title, nor does any in the 
First Fifty, but there are some nine in the Final Fifty to do so. No. 
66 is an upama- Sutta, 1 addressed to the monk Udayin, but in the six 
wpama-Discourses in the Third Division of the First Fifty, four were 
spoken to monks. The position of Discourse No. 66 is thus some- 
thing of an anomaly. Discourse No. 67, having a place-name for 
title, and including one of the few recorded rebukes to Sariputta, 2 
was spoken to an Order of monks. No. 68, again with a place-name 
for title, was given to various young men of family, apparently very 
recently ordained, several of whom were later to become well-known 
and respected figures in the Order. No. 70, also called after a place, 
was addressed to Assaji and Punabbasuka, two of the six sectarian 
leaders of groups of monks, and who made their head-quarters at 
Kitagiri. 

The first two Discourses in the Division on Monks are reputed to 
have been addressed by Gotama to Rahula, his son. No. 61, some- 
times called the “ criterion of Buddhist morality,” is concerned with 
the need to reflect before doing a deed on whether it will harm one- 
self and others ; and No. 62 is concerned with various forms of mind- 
development, bhavand. The next two Discourses are called the 
Cula - and Makd-mdlunkyaputta-SUttas , although the Mahd- is 
addressed more specifically to Ananda than to the monk Malun- 
kyaputta. While the first member of this pair gives reasons why 
current speculative views have not been explained by the Tathagata, 
in the latter the Teacher — after rebuking Malunkyaputta — spoke on 
the course and the practice to be followed for achieving escape, 


1 See M.L.S. Intr., p. xi. 


2 See below, p. xxvi. 




XIV 


Translator's Introduction 


nissarana, from the five fetters, as far as the stage where the medi- 
tator, realising the impermanence of all the meditative planes he 
has so far mastered, focuses his mind instead on the “ deathless 
element,” 1 the real, the excellent. 

Discourse No. 65 is as interesting both for its simile of the 
Thoroughbred Colt and the ten respects in which this becomes, by 
training; parinibbuta, 2 as for its reference to the seven kinds of monks. 
All of these, from the one “ freed both ways ” to the one that “ strives 
after faith,” each of whom would “ be a causeway for me across 
the mire,” are more fully explained in Sta. No. 70. 

No. 69 is reputed to have been spoken by Sariputta to the monks at 
large. Taking the monk Gulissani as the type of forest-dwelling 
monk, Sariputta recommends what his behaviour should be when he 
returns to stay with his Order, or otherwise people will conclude that 
he was lax and self-indulgent when he was alone in the forest. And 
Sariputta goes on to outline in positive terms the ways in which he 
should train himself in his solitude, and ends by advocating three 
forms of (Buddhist) yoga , yoking oneself to by earnest study. 
These are yoga devoted to abhidhamma 3 and abhivinaya ; the peaceful 
Deliverances; and uUanmanussadhamrm , 4 the mental states of men 
that have gone further (than the here-now) and the goal for the sake 
of which the forest-dwelling monk has gone forth. 

Each Discourse in the Division on Wanderers (Nos. 71-80) is called 
after the wanderer, paribbajaka, to whom it was delivered, with the 
exception of No. 78 which was spoken to Pancakanga the carpenter, 
a layman. But it was the outcome of a statement made by a 
wanderer; and his name, or rather his mother’s, forms the title. It 
therefore has similarities with the naming and the opening of Sta. 
No. 51. That they are not placed in the same Division is as much of 
a puzzle as is the separation of the Abhayarajahumdra-sutta (No. 58) 
and the Bodhirajakumara-sutta (No. 85), each named after a prince 
who never came to the throne. 

This Division gives some indication of the behaviour and con- 
versation of wanderers: sitting down and noisily shouting out 
tiracchdnakathd, low, worldly talk, but all the same appreciating that 


1 For six further references to amata-dhatu see PTC. I, p. 230. 

■ Cf. nibbdyeyya , in the simile of the fires, at M. i. 487. 

* See B.D . iii. Intr. p. x ff. and PTC . I, p. 216. 

4 See Fin. iii. 91, 92, iv. 25 (B.D. i. 159, 161, ii. 211) where this word is 
defined. 



Translator's Introduction 


xv 


the disciples of Gotama like quietude; of their attitude towards 
Gotama, whether favourable or unfavourable; of the views that 
interested them; of what they wanted to learn of the Buddha's 
teaching; and of what they were taught of this, which amounted 
to a very full measure of the whole (see especially Sta. No. 77). An 
experienced wanderer was doubtless a capable listener and learner. 

It is noteworthy that one of the very few occasions when nibbana is, 
in the Middle Fifty Discourses, made in any way more important than 
as the final member of a stereotyped sequence, is in the Mdgandiya - 
sutta (No. 75). This opens with the wanderer Magandiya scoffing 
at the samara Gotama and telling a brahman who was already 
favourably disposed towards the Lord and was expecting a visit 
from him, that it is but “ a sorry sight to see the sleeping-place of the 
good Gotama, a destroyer of growth ” — bhunahu , certainly a word 
of deep contempt (cf. Sn. 664; anariya bhunahu papaka dukkatakdri 
purisanta . . . nerayika), and translated by Lord Chalmers as “ rigid 
repressionist,” i.e. of the senses, which the wanderer appears to think 
should be given full scope. However Magandiya claims no 
originality for this abusive term; instead he asserts that it is told 
thus in a sutta of ours," evarh hi no sutte ocarati . 

The word bhunahu may be compared with that other misrepresen- 
tation of the Lord made by some recluses and brahmans when they 
say that “ the samana Gotama is a venayika (a perverter or leader 
away) who lays down the cutting off, annihilation and destruction of 
the essential being.” sato sattassa (M. Sta. 22). 1 For when the word 
venayika is not being used in its Buddhist and therefore favourable 
sense, as it was used by Upali in his great eulogy of the Lord (Sta. 
No. 56), it is not impossible to see between it and bhunahu some 
basic similarity of intention, perhaps even enough to read into this 
latter archaic and etymologically uncertain word the meaning of 
“ destroyer of beings,” which to the wanderers would be but the 
natural outcome of destroying the senses. Their mistake would 
have been in thinking that Gotama taught destruction; what he 
taught was control of the Sense-organs and the suppression of the 
fever of thirst for sensory impressions. Magandiya then hears that, 
as it is possible to attain extra-sensory delight, there is no longer any 
reason to envy the man whose pleasures are merely “ low,” hina , 
(illustrated by the similes of the lepers). Then comes the gentle 


1 At M . ii. .228 this speculative view is ascribed to “ some recluses and 
brahmans.” 



xvi Translator's Introduction 

persuasion (illustrated by the similes of the blind man) that the 
wanderers’ interpretation of “ health ” and “ nibbana ” lacks the 
ariyan vision. For, as the climax affirms, in order to know health 
and see nibbana as the stopping of this whole mass of the ill that has 
been generated by grasping after “ low ” things, it is essential to 
follow a prescribed course. Otherwise one will go astray, will be 
defrauded, as was the blind man. 

This reasoned talk was not lost upon Magandiya. He uttered the 
Three Goings for Refuge and asked for ordination as a monk; 
When informed by the Lord that former members of other sects had 
first to undertake a four months’ probation (Fin. i. 69), he, in 
common with Seniya the canine ascetic (Sta. No. 57) and Vaccha- 
gotta, another famous wanderer (No. 73), rather exaggeratedly 
asserted that he would undertake it for four years. They all how- 
ever appear to have been ordained at once, and not long afterwards 
each became “ one of the arahants.” These three Discourses there- 
fore have the added interest of using a Vinaya element to stress the 
fervour of a new adherent to the Order. That they record their 
corresponding episodes in exactly the same terms as one another 
is not unexpected. 

Furtl^r, the Mdgandiya-sutta is one of a number of narrations 
found in the Middle Fifty to tell of a spiritual evolution, 1 each more 
or less complete in itself and in little or no need of filling out from 
other contexts in the Pi$akas. It has been said already that this 
Discourse reveals that Gotama was known to the wanderers as 
bhundhu . It also reveals that the first line of a two-lined verse was 
part of the wanderers’ tradition. Against this, Gotama tells 
Magandiya that both the lines were spoken by former Buddhas — 
and these, judging by canonical evidence, were perhaps never very 
far from his thoughts. 2 Although this two-lined verse may not be 
precisely a dhammapada, a footprint of Dhamma, a word used in 
this technical sense at D. iii. 229 and A. ii. 29 where the four 
dhammapadani enumerated are said to be ancient, of long standing, 
traditional, it is nevertheless invested here with a great antiquity. 

The Division on Wanderers is also noteworthy for the two occasions 
on which Naked Ascetics, djivika , are mentioned. One of these is 
when the wanderer Sandaka is recorded to speak of them as “ children 
of a childless mother,” because they have only three great leaders, 

1 Others are the stories of King Pasenadi (Stas. 86-89), Arigulimala (No. 86), 
and Vacchagotta (Nos. 71-73). 

* See e.g. Sta. No. SI. 



Translator’s Introduction 


XVII 


niyydtaro , that is leaders out from duhkha and samsdra , and whom 
he names, in contradistinction to the large numbers of great leaders 
in this Dhamma and Discipline (Sta. No, 76). 

The other reference to Naked Ascetics is when the wanderer 
Vacchagotta in one of his questions to the Lord (No. 71) draws the 
response from him that, although he recollects ninety-one kappas, 
he knows of only one Naked Ascetic to have attained heaven. In 
my note on p. 161 below I have drawn attention to the tradition that 
Yipassin,the first Buddha to have preceded Gotamawhen these Bud- 
dhas are reckoned as six, is said to have arisen in the world ninety-one 
kappas ago. Taken together, these two passages may suggest that it 
was not necessary for Gotama’s recollection of former habitations to go 
back to ages remoter still, and that therefore when it is said of him, 
as of others too, that they recollect many a kappa of the world’s 
re-formation and disintegration, this is not a deliberately gross 
factual exaggeration so much as symbolical language devised to 
indicate immense reaches of the past, the precision of which, except 
in the case of the Buddha, and this only in very few passages, would 
be of no material significance. Again, these two passages, if taken 
together, may be regarded as one more indication that the numbering 
of the preceding Buddhas as six is indeed earlier than their numbering 
as twenty-four. For, unless this were of subsequent growth, why 
does the Buddha Gotama here clearly speak of ninety-one kappas, a 
figure so curiously reminiscent of the alleged date of Vipassin’s 
Buddhahood ? At Jd , i. 391 “ I myself was that Naked Ascetic 

But any mere claims, not based on fact, to recollecting former 
habitations (referring to the past) or to comprehending that beings 
uprise according to kamma (referring to the future) have to be 
waved aside and the actuality of the Teaching that is Dhamma 
(referring to the present) grasped instead: “ There is birth, atth’ eva 
jdtiy there is ageing and dying, there are grief, sorrow, suffering, 
lamentation and despair of which I lay down the suppression, 
nighaia , here and now ” (M . i. 430), So, “ Let be the past, let be 
the future. I will teach you Dhamma : if this is, that comes to be ; 
from the arising of this, that arises ; if this is not, that does not come 
to be; from the stopping of this, that is stopped ’^—pregnant words 
uttered to the wanderer Sakuludayin (M . ii. 32 ; c/. M. ii. 44), and by 

1 Mrs. Rhys Davids, in spits of her great appreciation of this 44 really 
universal statement ” (on cause), rather misses its special application in M . 
Sta. 79 as the 44 now ” between the past and the future; her 44 beginning ” and 
44 end ” I find both too finite and too vague; see KJS. ii. Intr. p. xi. 



xviii Translator's Introduction 

imputation stressing the here-and-now as the principal concern of 
the ariyan disciple. 

No royal person, in the First Fifty Discourses, figures in a story 
from the past, nor is any contemporary king or queen recorded to 
have been present when any one of these Discourses was spoken, the 
names of Birnbisara, Pasenadi and Ajatasattu being used merely to 
give point to an argument. The Royal Dtwisiofl (Nos# 81*90), on the 
other hand, although having only two Discourses named after a 
royal personage (No. 83, after a king who reigned in the distant past, 
and No. 85 after a prince who never ascended the throne), yet brings 
in a fine array of kings and queens and princes and contains no 
Discourses from which a royal name is absent: Kiki, King of Kasi in 
a story from the past (No. 81); Koravya, apparently a Kuru King 
(No. 82); Makhadeva, his unnamed son and his son’s descendants 
down to King Nimi and his son Kajarajanaka, also in a story from 
the past (No. 83); Avantiputta, King of Madhura, in a Discourse 
given after the parinibbdna (No. 84) ; Prince Bodhi (No. 85) ; King 
Pasenadi (Nos. 86-90) with his Queen Mallika, their child and another 
consort in No. 87 ; with Vi^udabha, his son, in Nos. 87 and 90; and 
with Soma and Sakula, said to have been other consoits, in No. 90; 
and besides Pasenadi, there is a reference to Ajatasattu, a reigning 
king, in No. 88. 

One of the most interesting aspects of the Royal Division is the 
cycle of Discourses (Nos. 86-89 and continuing into 90) in which 
Pasenadi’s spiritual evolution can be traced until it reached a full 
development and maturity, that is to say in the faith and reliance 
that he came to repose in the Lord. In Sta. No. 86, primarily 
concerned with the regeneration and birth in the “ ariyan birth,” 
ariydya jdtiyd , of the dreaded bandit Angulimala, Pasenadi was 
“ amazed ” at the Lord’s power to tame without stick or sword 
“ him that I was unable to tame with stick and sword.” In the next 
Discourse he chides Mallika for her blind assumption, as he takes it 
to be, that if the Lord says a thing is so, then it is so. She sends a 
brahman to the Lord to ask him to confirm that he had indeed said 
that grief and sorrow are born of affection rather than bliss and 
happiness, as seemed more commonly thought. This the Lord does 
and he gives the brahman many examples to explain what he means. 
Mallika adapts and particularises these to fit the circumstances of 
Pasenadi’s life with such success that he is again filled with wonder 
and amazement, this time at the Lord’s wisdom by means of which 



Translator’s Introduction 


xix 


he penetrates and perceives so much. And so he tells Mallika that 
he wishes to bathe ceremonially, a ritual that would purify him for 
three times uttering the solemn utterance: “ Praise to that Lord, 
arahant, perfect Buddha.” The king made this salutation at a 
distance, as did also on other occasions Brahmayu the brahman 
(M. ii. 140) and the devout brahman lady Dhanaiijanl, no doubt as 
a kind of charm or spell for averting ill-luck, once when she tripped 
or stumbled (Sta. No. 100). 

In Sta. No. 88, Pasenadi’s interest in the Buddha has obviously 
grown and, anxious to learn more about him, he visits Ananda and 
puts some questions to him, for example: would the Lord engage in 
such conduct as was offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans, 
and does he not praise getting rid of all unskilled states and acquiring 
all skilled ones ? So much delighted was he with the well-chosen 
words with which Ananda replied, that he persuaded this frugal- 
minded disciple to accept from him a piece of cloth that King 
Ajatasattu had sent as a present from over the border. 

Neither Sta. No. 87 nor No. 88 records any meeting between the 
king and the Buddha. But it seems that all the time the former’s 
faith and respect were building up to the great culmination recorded 
in Sta. No. 89, the Dhammacetiya . Here Pasenadi is recorded to 
have gone to visit the Lord and to greet him in the unusually devout 
but not unparalleled fashion of kissing and stroking his feet and then 
of twice pronouncing his own name: “ I, revered sir, am Pasenadi, 
King of Kosala.” On the Lord’s asking him why he pays such deep 
respect to “ this body ” and displays such tokens of friendship (thus 
indicating that this form of greeting was not in general use) Pasenadi, 
in a long and reasoned reply supported by deductions he had made 
from his own observations of life around him, gave seven grounds for 
his great veneration for the Buddha, Dhamma and Sariigha, in his 
eyes superior to anything the world has to offer as well as to any- 
thing that other recluses and brahmans appear to derive from the 
sects they favour. After he had left the Lord’s presence, the Buddha 
succinctly summarised his €lllogy as testimonies to Dhamma,” 
and exhorted the monks to learn and remember them, thus paying 
a signal compliment to the king. 

At A. v. 65-66 Pasenadi is again recorded to greet the Lord in this 
same manner. But when the Lord asked him why he did so, he said 
it was to show his gratitude and thankfulness for which he had ten 
reasons. 

In Sta. No. 90, Pasenadi asked not Ananda but the Lord himself 



xx Translator* 8 Introduction 

a number of questions: about omniscience, the purity of the four 
castes, devas and Brahma, and he declared himself to be pleased and 
delighted with every explanation given to him. It therefore seems 
that his faith and reliance had come full circle. 

Each of the ten Discourses in the Division on Brahmans (Nos. 
91-100) is called after the name of a brahman. Parallel versions of 
Discourses Nos. 92 and 98 occur in th6 Sit, ; and the chief material of 
No. 91, its core as it were, namely the enumeration of the Thirty-two 
Marks of a (or, the) Oreat Man, from a brahman point of view, 
also appears in other Discourses, for example in Dtgha Suttantas 
Nos. 14 and 30. 

Some of these brahmans are represented as holding Gotama in 
great esteem as did also Keniya the matted hair ascetic. Sangarava, 
at first, was an exception. He was loyal to the brahmans and also 
ignorant of the Lord’s moral Jiabit and wisdom, but he was willing 
to meet him. Had the Sangdrava-sutta been printed in full it would 
have been extremely long, for it contains “ autobiographical ” 
matter from the Ariyapariyesana-sutta and the Mahdsaccaka-sutta. 
It is a little disconcerting to find Sangarava, at the end of this 
tremendous dissertation, although commenting that “ the good 
Gotama’s striving has indeed been steadfast,” hurrying on to ask 
him if there were devas . They had not been mentioned hitherto in 
the Discourse. And indeed, setting aside the stereotyped mention 
of them in such passages as “teacher of devas and men,” there are 
very few other occasions in the Middle Fifty Discourses where they 
form a subject of conversation. One is in Sta. No. 90 where 
Pasenadi is recorded to ask the Lord whether there are devas , and if 
so whether they are returners or non-returners to this state of things, 
and where Vidu<Jabha is also recorded to ask Ananda about the 
Devas of the Thirty-three. In Discourse No. 90, howcveT, it would 
seem natural that, while the principal characters were waiting, rather 
uneasily, for the arrival of the brahman Sahjaya of the Akasa clan 
to tell them who it was that had brought a kaihdvatthUy a point of 
controversy, point at issue or subject of conversation, into the 
palace, 1 they should speak of various matters. But in Sta. No. 100 
I find the sudden introduction of this question about devas rather 
perplexing. 


1 In Discourse No. 87 we hear of another kathdvatthu filtering through into 
the palace. 



Translator's Introduction 


xxi 


It is interesting to see something of the relations that these brah- 
mans had with others, thus: Brahmayu, very old, wealthy, learned, 
venerated and himself full of veneration had Uttara, also learned in 
brahman lore, as pupil (No. 91); Sela had 300 brahman youths in his 
train, all of whom became ordained as monks by the Lord (No. 92); 
Assalayana seems to have been at the beck and call of 500 brahmans 
who were staying at SavatthI on business (No. 93); Gho^amukha, 
Esukarin and Dhananjani appear to have been on their own (Nos. 
94, 96, 97) ; an attempt was made by 500 brahmans who were staying 
at Opasada to dissuade CankI, who also lived there, from going to see 
Gotama (No. 95); Vasettha and Bharadvaja, two brahman youths, 
were staying at Icchanankala where many wealthy and distinguished 
brahmans were also staying (No. 98) ; Subha was staying in a house- 
holder's dwelling (No. 99); and Sangarava was living at Candala- 
kappa as was also a brahman lady 1 of his acquaintance through 
whose intervention Sangarava met the Lord (No. 100). All these 
brahmans, as a result of the conversations they had with Gotama, 
either became lay-devotees or joined the Order of monks — all except 
CankI. But CankI, in the Discourse to which he gives his name, 
insisted that all the brahmans should go to visit Gotama, whose 
praises he sings at length and in a more factual way than Upali, for 
it did not seem right to him that one of such immeasurable splendour, 
vanria> as the good Gotama should go to see the brahmans. When 
they arrived Gotama in fact addressed his Discourse principally to a 
brahman youth named Kapathika, also very learned, and who, after 
he had learnt a great deal about the way to awaken to truth and 
attain it, became a lay-devotee. 

For the divergent views professed, eoarhvddino evarkditthino , by 
contemporary leaders of other sects, the Middle Fifty Discourses 
prove a mine of information. It is apparent that the compilers of 
the M . were well acquainted with these views; and also that the 
contact between Gotama and the other sects was close and living and 
on the whole friendly, 

There is mention of the views attributed to the six most famous 
heretical leaders of other sects, Purana Kassapa and so on (Stas. Nos. 
60, 69, 7&, 77, etc.), and also of other divergent views less frequently 
cited in the Pitakas, such as “ there is (not) formlessness through- 
out, n “ there is (not) the stopping of becomings throughout ” (No. 


1 It was this lady who tripped, see above, p. xix. 



xxu 


Translator’s Introduction 


60) ; and “ all is (not) pleasing to me, part is (not) pleasing to me ” 
(No. 74). Again, we find Gotama refusing to explain any of the 
opposing views in another and an important set found throughout 
the Nikayas : “ the world is (not) eternal ” down to “ The Tathagata 
both is and is not after dying, neither is nor is not after dying ” 
(No. 63). He refused both because the living of the Brahma-faring 
has nothing to do with and does not depend on the explanation of 
such views, even as the life of a man pierced by an arrow could not 
be saved if, before allowing it to be extracted, he insisted on knowing 
such irrelevant details as its make, the kind of bow it was shot from 
or the kind of man who shot it (No. 63) ; and he refused because such 
views, wildernesses and fetters that they are, neither conduce to 
nibbana nor do they yield any possible description of the Tathagata . 
For, since he is freed from all denotation by the khandha , he cannot 
be “ reckoned ” by the four categories of “ arising ” after dying, and 
it is inept to attempt to do so. 

Views held by recluses and brahmans indeed form part of the 
stock-in-trade of the M, In the Royal Division and that on Brah- 
mans, however, various other matters come to the fore as ones in 
which brahmans were particularly interested: caste (in both 
Divisions), mantras f sacrifice (No. 99), the Thirty-two Marks of a 
Great Man, from the brahman point of view, and the “ wealth ” 
brahmans lay down as the typical wealth of each caste (No. 96). The 
Buddhist counter-assertions are that in freedom as against freedom 
members of each caste are on an exact level, for it is not caste in 
itself that is undesirable or to be done away with (which Gotama 
never tried to do), but the arrogant brahman claims. Members of 
all four castes are alike, for example, in that if one of their members 
turn thief or recluse, he is henceforth to be reckoned simply as 
“ thief ” or “ recluse,” his identification by caste being lost. The 
ariyan disciples also asserted that other brahman claims could be 
argued out of court (No. 99) or at best shown not to be the final 
means to an end but rather mental equipments for developing a 
mind that is without enmity or malevolence (No. 99); and they laid 
down that a man’s wealth is the ariyan transcendental Dhamma, 
ariyarh lokuttaram dhammarh purisassa sandhanarh panndpemi (No. 
90 ) — a “ man’s ” be it noted, a general term beneath which monks 
and members of this caste or that alike lie buried. The final 
summing up is in Sta. No. 98=$n. 650: “ By deeds is one a brahman, 
by deeds no brahman.” 

Yet although, in terminology reminiscent of the Upanishads, 



Translator's Introduction xxiii 

“ there is the arising of a being from what has come to be, he arises 
according to what he does . . . creatures are heirs to deeds,” bhuta 
bhutassa upapatti hoti , yam karoti tena upapajjati . . , kammadayada 
sattd (No. 57), there is also the deed, kamrm, which, neither dark nor 
bright and neither dark nor bright in results, is the highest of four 
types of deeds since it conduces to the destruction of deeds (No. 57). 
This is the deed that carries forward no fruits or reactions and which 
is therefore different in category from, but not inconsistent with 
such statements as “ there is indeed cause ” (M. i. 405). It is for 
professing this last belief that the one Naked Ascetic is said to have 
gone to heaven. 1 

I have already remarked on the two questions asked about 
dovas , the one occurring in the Royal Division and the other in 
the Division on Brahmans, and also on the questions about caste 
that occur in the two Divisions (but also elsewhere). It is in- 
teresting, but perhaps quite without significance, to find other 
episodes that these two Divisions have in common. For example, 
each has a Discourse said to have been delivered after the 
parinibbdna (Nos. 84 and 94), 2 and each one in which the Buddha 
was greeted in a specially reverential way (Nos. 89 and 91). 
Thus, in Discourse No. 84 Avantiputta, raja (chieftain or king) 
of Madhura is so much impressed by Maha-Kaccana's arguments 
about the potentially equal purity of members of all four castes that, 
wishing to become an updsaka , a lay-devotee, he utters the usual 
formula which by then must have been quite venerable : “ Excellent, 
excellent. It is as if one might set upright , . and so on. But 
then, before asking to be accepted as “ an updsaka going for refuge 
from this day forth for as long as life lasts,” which was also customary, 
he deviates from the norm by stating: “ Thus I am going to the 
revered Kaecana for refuge and to Dhamma and the Order of 
monks.” To this Kaecana objects: “ But do not, sire, go for refuge 
to me. You must go for refuge only to that Lord to whom I have 
gone for refuge.” Upon Avantiputta asking where this Lord is 
staying at present, Kaecana replies that he has attained complete or 
final nibbana, parinibbuta . Protesting that he would have gone 
even 100 yojana to see him had he heard that he was staying that 
distance away, Avantiputta concurs: “ Since that Lord has now 


1 See above, p. xvii. 

* Discourse No. 108 is also said to have been held after the parinibbdna . 



XXIV 


Translator's Introduction 


attained final nibbana, I am going for refuge to that Lord who has 
attained final nibbana and to Dhamma and to the Order of monks.” 

In Discourse No. 94 the brahman Ghotamukha visits the monk 
Udena and hears from him a discourse about the four kinds of 
“ tormentors.” 1 He is impressed and wishes to become an updsaka. 
This Discourse then proceeds precisely as does No. 84, except that 
the raja and the brahman give different appellations to the Lord, no 
doubt in accordance with their own status in the world. 

Maha-kaccana was a contemporary of the Buddha. This incident 
must therefore have taken place comparatively soon after the 
parinibbana. There seems little information about Avantiputta, 
beyond MA . iii. 319 calling him Avantiratthe ranno dhztaya putto, 
and where this “ king ” perhaps means Pajjota (whom Kaccana had 
established in the Buddhist teaching), Avantiputta being thus his 
grandson. Neither Ghotamukha nor Udena appears to be men- 
tioned anywhere in the Pali Canon but here, and so we can only 
presume that they were contemporaneous with the Buddha and that 
no very long time had elapsed since the parinibbana when this 
conversation between them was supposed to have taken place, or 
else Ghotamukha (as also Avantiputta) would already have heard 
of it. 

These two Suttas provide enough evidence to show that, even 
as refuge was taken in the Buddha during his life-time, it must 
continue to be so taken after his death. No bhikkhu could regard 
himself as a refuge or allow others to do so. But he could accept 
into the community a person who wished to be an updsaka . This 
point does not I think arise elsewhere in the M. than in these two 
Discourses, for on every other occasion where refuge was taken, it 
was the Lord himself who established the new person in his teaching 
and accepted him as an updsaka . That is to say, there appears to 
be no record of any bhikkhu accepting an updsaka into the community 
at a time when the Lord might have been staying some distance 
away, although seeing to it that he took his refuge in the Lord and 
not in the bhikkhu himself. There is no evidence for this, but one 
may none the less not unjustifiably imagine that it may sometimes 
have occurred. Responsibility to ordain candidates into the Order 
of monks was delegated by the Lord first to bhikkhus acting alone 
and then to the Samgha acting corporately (Fin. Mahavagga I. 12 
and 28). It would therefore seem not only possible, but it must 


1 See below, p. 6 jgT. 



Translator's Introduction 


xxv 


have been necessary in the expanding community to allow bhikkhus, 
even if as individuals rather than as members of the Samgha, to 
accept a new updsaka . These two Suttas show that this was at 
least the case after the parinibbdna. 

I have already referred to the deep respect Pasenadi paid to the 
Lord on greeting him i 1 kissing and stroking his feet and pronouncing 
his own name, and to the fact that this was an unusual and an 
unusually devout form of salutation. It was one also adopted by 
Anna-Ko£<Janna (& i. 193 ) when he came to see the Buddha after a 
long interval, twelve years according to the Commentary. And it 
was also adopted by two brahmans, not as a greeting on first 
approaching the Lord, but rather as a salutation, a form of acknow- 
ledgment of his greatness made during the course of a conversation 
with him. And almost immediately afterwards these two brahmans, 
Manatthaddha at S . i. 177 and Brahmayu in M . Sta. No. 91, asked to 
become an updsaka , but not before the Lord had asked each of them 
to rise up (or, stand up, utfhehi at S. i. 178, utthaha at M. ii. 145) and 
sit down in his own place (although, as far as the record goes Manat- 
thaddha had all the time been standing) “ where your mind was first 
pleased with me,” The two concourses that witnessed these scenes 
marvelled, the one that Manatthaddha who greeted neither his 
mother nor father, teacher nor eldest brother should show such deep 
respect to the recluse Gotama; and the other at the great psychic 
power of the recluse Gotama in virtue of which the well-known and 
renowned Brahmayu showed such veneration. That they did so 
provides additional evidence that this kind of salutation or greeting 
was rare and of a specially fervent kind. 

The kissing of the feet and the pronouncing of one’s own name go 
together, but appear to do so only when it is the Buddha who is 
evoking so great a respect; to members of other sects only the name 
was now and again pronounced (e.g. at S. i. 78, Ud . 65) and the rest 
of the greeting conveyed by the normal method of stretching forth 
the joined palms. 

As far as the text gO 08 , Brahmayu pronounced his name once 
only, whereas Anna-Koijdanna, Pasenadi (twice) and Manatthaddha 
are recorded each to have pronounced his own name twice. They all 
apostrophised the Lord in accordance with their own social status. 
So, apart from this small exception in Brahmayu’s case, and apart 
from Manatthaddha not mentioning his status, the Pali tradition of 


1 See above, p. xix. This occurs in Sta. No. 80. 


xx vi Translator's Introduction 

kissing the Lord’s feet and pronouncing one’s own name appears to 
be based on a regularised pattern which, besides appearing to denote 
some unusual excitation of feeling, certainly signifies a highly 
reverential and seldom used form of greeting and acknowledgment, 
far from being in common vogue. 

In his Commentaries on the M. and &, Buddhaghosa has nothing 
to say about kissing the Lord’s feet. The kiss however establishes a 
living link, it is a “ touch;” and although primarily intended to 
betoken a physical relationship, when regarded as a blessing or a 
salutation or a ceremonial greeting it takes on a ritual aspect. Bu., 
on the other hand, has an exegesis on ndma, name. Although this 
occurs once only (&4. i. 282) and although it might have done fuller 
justice to the inner and vital significance of the name 1 and the uttering 
of it, it yet does not lack in penetration, for it ends by saying: “ So 
he (i.e. Anna-Kon<Janna) makes known his name, thus closing for 
beings the path to the sorrowful ways and opening the path to 
heaven.” As Bu. perceives, the pronouncing of the name is one of 
“ the keys to power ” by means of which one puts oneself into the 
power of someone else. For this reason names were sometimes kept 
secret 2 * as was for example Anathapii^lika’s name Sudatta, known 
only to himself and his family. 8 So that, voluntarily to state one’s 
own name is, as much of the world’s literature testifies, an express 
acknowledgment of the faith and trust that one person unreservedly 
places in another. 

The kiss and the pronouncement of the name are physical and 
spiritual actions which, when made together, indicate a very close 
bond of union, the prototype for which is the father-son relationship 
where, as some records of Indian thought show, over and above the 
physical paternity a spiritual paternity may also be presumed: 
“ On returning from a journey he should ‘ touch ’ (‘ kiss ’) his head, 
saying : ‘ You, my son, originated from my limbs, you are bom of my 
heart, you are indeed as myself ’ . . . and he therewith takes hold of 
his son by name . . . and says: ‘ By your name, my son, I kiss (touch) 
your head.’ ” 4 

These Middle Fifty Discourses also contain records of two rebukes 
administered by the Buddha to Sariputta. There seems to be only 

1 “ It is by his deathless name that Indra outlasts all generations of men,” 

RV. 18. 7. 

a Thus also warding off the threat of the evil eye. 8 Vin. ii. 156, V A. 

4 Kausitaki Upanishad II, 11. 



Translator’s Introduction 


XXVIi 


one other such occasion, 1 unless we count the Sampasadaniya - 
sutlanta 2 where the Buddha, by asking Sariputta whether he knew 
anything either of the past or the future Buddhas he had referred to, 
tried to curb his chief disciple’s almost excessive glorification of the 
Teacher. 

In the Catuma-sutta (No. 67) the Lord had had to dismiss from his 
presence an extremely noisy Order of monks 3 that Sariputta and 
Moggallana had brought to see him. When they were allowed to 
return, the Lord asked Sariputta what he had thought when the 
Order was sent away. His thoughts had been, he replied: “ Now, 
the Lord, untroubled, can abide intent on abiding in ease here and 
now. 4 And we too, untroubled, can abide intent on abiding in ease 
here and now,” But to have done so would have been a dereliction 
of his duty, bharabhava , to the Order of which he was in charge. So, 
the rebuke was: “ Wait, Sariputta, wait. Never let such a thought 
arise in you again.” Moggallana was then asked the same question. 
The first part of his answer was the same as the first part of Sariputta’s. 
But his second part, showing that he was aware of his respon- 
sibilities: “ The venerable Sariputta and I will now look after the 
Order of monks,” was approved by the Lord, who added that either 
he could look after it or Sariputta and Moggallana could do so. 

What then, in view of this statement made by the Teacher to 
Moggallana, are we to make of his assertion to Devadatta 5 that he 
would not hand over the Order even to Sariputta and Moggallana, 
far less therefore to Devadatta ? Is it possible that at that time he 
thought his chief disciples too old ? He himself, according to 
Devadatta, was approaching the end of his life, although there may 
have been about eight years still to run before the parinibbdna . 6 
Sariputta however seems to have been well and active at the time of 
this episode as he was sent to Rajagaha to carry out an Act of 
Information against Devadatta. It is also true that Devadatta, in 


1 Jd, i. 161-2. « D, Sta. No. 28. 

3 Although they may have been “ novices ” as said at DPPN ., p. 1110, n, 

10, and see below, p. 129 n. 1, they are simply called agantukd , in-comers, 
while the resident monks are called nevdsikd, 

4 See above, p. xi. 4 Vin . ii. 188. 

• Devadatta/ e attempt to wrest the leadership of the Order away from 

Gotama is, in the Vin,, sandwiched in between two other episodes, in the first 
of which Devadatta curries favour with Prince Ajatasattu, and in the second 
incites him to slay his father, Bimbisara. He, however, abdicates in favour of 
his son. According to Mhvs. 11. 32 the Buddha died in the eighth year of 
Ajatasattu’s reign. 



xxviii Translator's Introduction 

telling Gotama that he is now worn, old and full of years, does not 
put in the final touch of saying that he is in the eighties, asitika. 
The absence of this word may be an indication that Gotama was 
actually not so old as his cousin could have wished, and was in all 
likelihood not more than in the seventies. Although it seems 
difficult to discover Sariputta’s age when he died and also the 
length of time by which he predeceased the Founder, he was probably 
the younger of the two as Us mother appears to have been alive at the 
time of his death. 1 

On the other hand it is not impossible that the Vinaya-bhanakas 
and the Majjhima-bhanakas 2 followed somewhat different traditions 
concerning the possible leadership of the Order, the former holding 
that only Gotama could lead, and for that reason they attribute the 
formulation of practically every one of the Vinaya rules to him; and 
the latter holding that others also could look after the Order, as our 
M. context suggests, and as is borne out to some extent by the 
Discourses given by disciples and of which Gotama is recorded to 
have approved. However, this is a point that could only be 
substantiated by further research. 

Again it is possible, and perhaps it is even probable, that the 
episodes recorded at M. i. 459 and Fin. ii. 188 refer to different 
Samghas, For samgha is not necessarily a comprehensive word for 
the whole Order of monks, and which indeed S. Dutt thinks was 
known as the Samgha of the four quarters. 8 It can also refer, and 
does often refer to this Order or that, each regarded as part of the 
whole and bound by the same rules and regulations, but marked off 
from one another by virtue of the residence of monks within this 
stma (boundary) or that. If this is so, then Sariputta and Moggal- 
lana might well have been regarded as the right disciples to be in 
charge of some particular Samgha, but not necessarily of another; 
and, accepting this hypothesis, the apparent contradiction between 
M, i. 459 and Vin . ii. 188 would be resolved. 

Finally, the Buddha at the end of his life says, as recorded, 4 that it 
does not occur to a Tathagata: “I, aham f will look after the (or, an) 
Order of monks.” Again, therefore, this does not tally with his 
statement at M. i. 459 that either he or Sariputta and Moggallana 
could look after a (localised and particular ?) Order of monks. 
Whether the Buddha sometimes spoke as a man, the much tried but 

» SA. iii. 213. ~ 

1 DA* 16 says that the Majjhima was handed over to the school of Sfiriputta, 

* Early Buddhist Monachism . 4 D. ii. 100. 


Translator's Introduction xxix 

ever valiant and selfless Leader and Founder of the whole Order, and 
whether he sometimes also spoke as Tathagata, trackless, incon- 
numerable, freed from reckoning or designation by the five khandha , l 
is a point still requiring further investigation. Personally I incline 
to think there are grounds suggesting that he sometimes spoke as 
Tathagata and, if so, this Bigha passage would be such a case. 
Although the personal pronoun is frequently used for the sake of 
emphasis, I do not believe dham to be a key-word here — even a 
Buddha uses the conventional parlance of the world. 8 I believe the 
key-word is Tathagata, one who has nothing more to do with the 
common difficulties of either a monastic or a secular world, and that 
it may here contain, although in a contrary sense, some hidden 
reference to part of the Bodhisatta's vows: “ May I look after an 
Order of monks.” 8 This is a vow, an aspiration for the future. The 
Tathagata, on the other hand, is in every way accomplished, free of 
past, future and present, beyond all change and mutation and the 
relationships imposed by personality. Pali is a most precise 
instrument in many ways, and I believe that where a certain term is 
used it is for some definite reason and has something definite to 
convey. It is for us to “ swelter at the task ” 4 of regaining the 
wonderful precision of language the teachers and bhayakas of old 
knew so well how to employ. 

The other occasion when, in these Middle Fifty Discourses, 
Sariputta is recorded to have been rebuked (Sta. No. 97) was when 
he established the dying brahman Dhananjani in htne Brahmaloke , 
“ in the lesser, the Brahma-world,” although there was something 
further to be done for him. It seems to me that since the attain- 
ment of the Brahma- world or of companionship with Brahma is not 
the ultimate goal of the Brahma-farer who is the Dhamma-farer and 
even-farer, this alone is a sufficient reason for taking hme and 
Brahnaloke in apposition to one another as though, while separate 
and the former not actually qualifying the latter, 5 they nevertheless 
belong to one another in Buddhist thought. The Brahma-world 
is less Or lesser when Compared with the goal set before the ariyan 
disciple. Therefore the rebuke was justified in that Sariputta, 
missing a rare opportunity, had failed to lift up the brahman's 

* if. i. 487, 488. 

* Cf. if, i. 600, yan ca loke vuttam iena voharati apara masarh . 

* E.g. Mhvu. i. 38, 238, 331. * Dhp. 276. 

* According to A. P. Buddhadatta, Concise Pali- English Dictionary , htna is 
an adjective. PED. gives it as p.p. of jahati . 



XXX 


Translator' 8 Introduction 


mind to heights it was probably able to encompass. If so, if 
Dhananjani had truly been capable of greater spiritual achievement 
had he been rightly taught, then it would seem that the brahman 
youth Subha Todeyyaputta (Sta. No. 99) was, on the contrary, not 
yet ready to go beyond instruction in the way to companionship with 
Brahma. For this is the instruction he received from Gotama him- 
self who propounded the usual method for gaining this companion- 
ship: the development of the four brahmavihdra . In the disci- 
pline for an ariyan the evidence goes to show that this did not 
have attainment of the Brahma-world as its goal as it did for 
brahmans. 

A long article might be written to illustrate the high regard and 
esteem in which the Buddha held Sariputta, his own (spiritual) son, 
anujata , “ who rolls on the Wheel of Dhamma set rolling by me.” 1 
One may therefore suppose that the Buddha, refusing to follow the 
wrong course of showing partiality, chanddgati , which with the other 
three agati , he often spoke against, 2 intended his rebukes to Sariputta 
to intimate the pitfalls of his responsible position in the Order — as 
preceptor to Rahula 3 and many another, as looking after an Order, 
and as friend and counsellor of brahmans — and hence to provide 
examples for right thought and behaviour and warnings against 
wrong for the men who came after. 

The “rich variety of the Majjhima” — how true are not these words 
of the late F. L. Woodward. 4 It is long, it is thorough, many of its 
Discourses are complete in themselves, which, while meaning that a 
great deal may be learnt from any one of them, does not at all mean 
that they will not grow in depth and significance the more their 
affinities with other parts of the Pitakas can be traced. Sometimes 
two or more existing versions are word for word alike ; sometimes in 
contexts that are otherwise parallel interesting variations and 
divergencies are displayed ; sometimes the conclusion that has been 
worked up to is quite different after an otherwise identical narrative ; 
or, once some part of a story or dissertation has been told in more or 
less the same words it may at a certain point break off and proceed 
on different lines. If a concordance of the M . were made, the number 
of passages having parallel versions elsewhere and also the number of 


1 if. Sta. 92 =$n. 657. 

* Vin. i. 283, D. iii. 182, A. i. 72 (and for further references see B.D. i. 313 

n. 7). 

» Ja. i. 161*2. 


4 K .S. iii. Intr. p. xiv. 



Translator's Introduction xxxi 

times certain themes recur within the AL itself might cause some 
surprise. 

In the Middle Fifty Discourses the overriding emphasis is perhaps 
laid on the jhdna or fine-material meditative stages; the ayatana f 
the immaterial or incorporeal meditative stages or planes culminating 
in the stopping of feeling s.nd perceiving; and on the threefold 
knowledge, tevijjd (see e.g. Stas. Nos. 51, 52, 59, 64, 65, 66, 71, 77, 79, 
99, 100). Discourse No. 51 gives the lead: it lays down the whole 
training for a monk from the arising of a Tathagata in the world, 
through the young man of family being ordained a monk, then 
possessing himself of moral conduct, of control over his senses, of 
vigilance, mindfulness and clear consciousness, then purifying his 
mind of the five Hindrances after which he can acquire mastery in the 
four jhdna, and finally can direct his mind to the gaining of the three 
knowledges, tevijjd . This Discourse propounds all the parts of this 
process in standardised words found in other passages (cf. Stas. Nos. 
55, 60, 61, 76, 79), All the time it is leading up to a climax which, 
appearing again elsewhere and always in the same stereotyped 
words (cf, Stas. Nos. 55, 60, 61, 94), is none the less striking or im- 
portant for that. It is that, of the four “ tormentors ” (of each of 
which a number of the Discourses give a very full description), the 
last 4< tormentor,” who in fact is a tormentor neither of himself nor 
of others, is he who, having fulfilled the training as set forth in 
these Discourses, is “ here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, an 
experiencer of bliss that lives with self Brahma-become,” nicchdlo 
nibbuto sUibhuto sukhapatisamvedi brahmabhutena attand viharati. 
This is a description applied only but invariably to the non-tormentor. 
He has reached a summit. Harmlessness, ahimsd } was a living 
force, great in its results. 1 

This unravelling of the tangle which is man, beside whom animals 
are an open clearing (Sta. No. 51, M. i. 340-341), and this showing of 
the ordered way by which “ this sure Dhamma ” (No. 60, At. L 401) 
leads on to the freeing of the mind from the three cankers of sense- 
pleasures, becoming and ignorance, this consequent assumption of 
a self that lives Brahma-become, is of the essence of and crucial to 
the Buddha's Teaching. 

To dwell with self Brahma-become is, as these Middle Fifty 
Discourses make abundantly clear, an achievement superior to abiding 
in or dwelling in the bmhmavihdra . Yet, if these, sublime as each 


1 Cf. S. i. 75, “ let not the self-lover harm another.” 



xxxii 


Translator's Introduction 


one is, for the Lord abides in each one, 1 are placed against the wide 
background of his teaching, as in Sta. No. 52, it is to be expected for 
a monk that if he stand firm in the conviction that, like the jhdna , 
each of the brahmavihdra when regarded as a freedom of the mind, is 
(karmically) effected and thought out, abhisankhata abhisancetayita , 
impermanent and of the nature to cease (as one emerges from medi- 
tation), then, having sought for a “ door to the deathless ” so as to 
make himself safe, ati&Mlh SOttkifh kStUfh , he may become an arahant 
or a non-returner. This is expressed by saying: “ he attains the 
destruction of the cankers; but if he fails to do so then ... by the 
destruction of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore), he is of 
spontaneous uprising, one who attains nibbana there, not liable to 
return from that world.** It is of interest to observe that while the 
M. uses the three associated words arahant, sakaddgdmin and sold- 
panna , the technical term andgdmin , non-returner, is not found at all 
and is represented only by its formula (e.g. in Stas. Nos. 52, 64, 68, 
73). 

A basic part of the training necessary to bring the goal into view — 
here mostly spoken of in terms of the threefold knowledge — is the 
turning away from and renunciation of sense-pleasures (Stas. Nos. 
54, 59, 66, 67, 68, 75, 80, 99) together with the refusal to be entranced 
by sensory impacts or impingements. In place of sensory enjoy- 
ment and craving there should be a steady development of that 
equanimity and mindfulness wherein all grasping after the material 
things of the world is stopped entirely. Derived extra-sensorily, 
this other happiness which ensues is more peaceful and exquisite 
(e.g. Stas. Nos. 59, 79) than that due to the senses. It is not only 
pleasant feeling that belongs to happiness. On the contrary, as 
laid down by the Tathagata, “ whenever, wherever, whatever 
happiness is found, it belongs to happiness,” yattha yaUha sukharh 
upalabbhati yahim yahim tan-tam Tathagato sukhasmim panndpeti 
(Sta. No. 59). The renunciation of grasping after sense-pleasures 
is however but a foretaste of the unresting forward movement 
characteristic of meditation. In no stage in the jhdna or the dyatana 
should the meditator pause : “ it is not enough, get rid of it, transcend 
it ” (Af. i. 455), and as he has been taught to do by the Parable of the 
Raft, 2 until he can enter and abide in the stopping of feeling and 
perceiving (M . i. 456) where he is free of all fetters, whether minute 


1 brahma rnetlavihari . . . bhagava hi mettavihdri , M. i. 369. 

* See M.L.S. i. 176 f. 



Translator's Introduction 


xxxiii 

or massive. Indeed, “ faring along as instructed it will not be long 
before he (the aspirant, earnest and zealous in training) knows and 
sees of himself. Even so is deliverance from the direst bond — the 
bond of ignorance ” (M . ii. 44). 

I have to acknowledge with gratitude the debt I owe both to 
Mr. P. Mehta for reading the typescript, and to my colleague, Mr. 
J. J. Jones, translator of the M aha vastu, for reading the proofs. 


London , 1955. 


I. B. Horner. 




ABBREVIATIONS 


A. 

= Anguttara-Nikaya. 

AA. 

= Commentary on A. 

Asl. 

= Atthasalini. 

B.D. 

= Book of the Discipline . 

B.H.S. Diet. 

, = Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary 
(Franklin Edgerton). 

Budv. 

= Buddhavarnsa. 

C.P.D. 

= Critical Pali Dictionary 

(Dines Andersen and Helmer Smith). 

Corny. 

== Commentary. 

D. 

~ Dfgha-Nikaya. 

DA. 

= Commentary on D. 

DhA. 

= Commentary on Dhp. 

Dhp., or Dh 

, = Dhammapada. 

Dhs. 

= Dhammasahgani. 

Dial. 

= Dialogues of the Buddha . 

D.P.P.N. 

= Dictionary of Pali Proper Names 
(G. P. Malalasekera). 

Expos. 

= Expositor . 

Fur. Dial. 

= Further Dialogues of the Buddha . 

G.S. 

= Gradual Sayings . 

H.J.A.S. 

= Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies. 

I.H.Q. 

= Indian Historical Quarterly. 

ItA. 

= Commentary on Iti, 

Iti. 

= Itivuttaka. 

Ja. 

= Jataka. 

J.P.T.8. 

= Journal of the Pali Text Society . 

Khp. 

= Khuddakapa^ha. 

KhpA.. 

= Commentary on Khp. 

K.S. 

= Kindred Sayings. 

Km. 

= Kathavatthu, 

M. 

= Majjhima-Nikaya. 

MA. 

== Commentary on M. 

Mhvs. 

= Mahavamsa. 

Mhm. 

= Mahavastu. 


XXXV 



XXXVI 


Abbreviations 


Miln . 

Min . Anth. 

M.L.S. 

Mpps. 

Nd. 

Netti. 

Nissag. 

Pac. 

P.E.D. 

P . Purity 
Pss . Breth. 
P/T.C. 

Pis . 

PtsA. 

Pug . 

PF. 

SA . 

S.B.E. 
S.H.B . 

Sn. 

SnA . 

Sta. 

Thag . 

Thag A. 
U.C.R. 

Ud. 

UdA . 

Vbh. 

VbhA. 

Vin. 

VinA . 

Fism. 

Ft^. 


= Milindapanha. 

= Minor Anthologies of the Pali Canon . 
= Middle Length Sayings . 

= Mahaprajnaparamitasastra 

(translated by Et. Lamotte). 

= Niddesa. 

= Nettipakaraija. 

= Nissaggiya. 

= Pacittiya. 

= Pali-English Dictionary 

(T. W. Rhys Davids and W. Stede). 
Path of Purity. 

Psalms of the Brethren. 

Pali Tipitakarh Concordance 
(F. L. Woodward, E. M. Hare, etc.). 
Patisambhidamagga. 

Commentary on Pt». 

Puggalapannatti. 

Commentary on Petavatthu. 

Rig-Veda. 

Samyutta-Nikaya. 

Commentary on S. 

Sacred Books of the East. 

Simon Hewavitarne Bequest. 
Suttanipata. 

Commentary on Sn. 

Sutta. 

Theragatha. 

Commentary on Thag. 

University of Ceylon Review . 

Udana. 

Commentary on Ud. 

Vibhanga. 

Commentary on Vbh. 

Vinaya-pitaka. 

Commentary on Vin. 

Visuddhimagga. 

Commentary on Vimanavatthu. 



I. THE DIVISION ON HOUSEHOLDERS 

(Gahapativagga) 




51. DISCOURSE TO KANDARAKA 1 

(Kandarakasufcta) 

[889] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
Campa on the bank of the Gaggara lotus-pond together with a large 
Order of monks. Then Pessa, the son of an elephant-trainer, and 
the wanderer Kandaraka approached the Lord; when they had 
approached, Pessa, the son of the elephant-trainer, having greeted 
the Lord, sat down at a respectful distance. But the wanderer 
Kandaraka exchanged greetings with the Lord; having conversed 
in a friendly and courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance. 
As he was standing at a respectful distance the wanderer Kandaraka, 
having looked round at the Order of monks which became absolutely 
silent, spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ It is wonderful, good Gotama, it is marvellous, good Gotama, 
that is to say how the Order of monks has been led 2 properly by 
the good Gotama. And, good Gotama, those who in the long past 
were perfected ones, fully Self-Awakened Ones — did these Lords 
also have an equally excellent Order of monks that they led properly 
even as the Order of monks is now being led properly by the good 
Gotama ? And, good Gotama, those who in the distant future will 
be perfected ones, fully Self-Awakened Ones — will these Lords 
also have an equally excellent Order of monks that they will lead 
properly even as the Order of monks is now being led properly 
by the good Gotama 1” 

“ It is so, Kandaraka; it is so, Kandaraka. Those who, Kan- 
daraka, in the long past were perfected ones, fully Self- Awakened 
Ones — these Lords had an equally excellent Order of monks that 
they led properly, even as the Order of monks is now being led 
properly by me. And those, Kandaraka, who in tho distant future 


1 Kandaraka (whom MA. iii. 2 says was a clothed wanderer) asks only one 
question however; but the answer and the way Pessa takes this up lead on 
to the main topics: the ineffectiveness and cruelty of asceticism, and the 
disciple's development from the moment he acquires faith to his attainment 
of arahantship. The name of this Discourse might more suitably be rendered : 
“ Discourse prompted by Kandaraka.” 

1 patipadita , made to fare, to journey along. 

3 



4 


51. Kandarakasutta 


I. 339-340 


will be perfected ones, fully Self- A wakened Ones — these Lords will 
have an equally excellent Order of monks that they will lead pro- 
perly, even as the Order of monks is now being led properly by me. 
For there are, Kandaraka, monks in this Order of monks who are 
perfected ones, the cankers destroyed, who have lived the life, done 
what was to be done, shed the burden, attained their own goal, 
and who, by the utter destruction of the fetters of becoming, are 
freed by perfect profound knowledge. And there are, Kandaraka, 
monks in this Order of monks who are learners, undeviating in 
moral habit, 1 * undeviating in conduct, intelligent, their ways of 
living intelligent, and these dwell with their minds well applied to 
the four applications of mindfulness. What four ? As to this, 
Kandaraka, [340] a monk fares along contemplating the body in 
the body, ardent, clearly conscious (of it), mindful (of it), so as to 
control the covetousness and dejection in the world; he fares along 
contemplating the feelings in the feelings, ardent, clearly conscious 
(of them), mindful (of them), so as to control the covetousness and 
dejection in the world; he fares along contemplating the mind in 
the mind, ardent, clearly conscious (of it), mindful (of it), so as to 
control the covetousness and dejection in the world; he fares along 
contemplating the mental states in the mental states, ardent, clearly 
conscious (of them), mindful (of them), so as to control the covetous- 
ness and dejection in the world.” 8 

When this had been said, Pessa, the son of an elephant-trainee 
spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ It is wonderful, revered sir, it is marvellous, revered sir, that 
these four applications of mindfulness are so well laid down by the 
Lord for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of griefs 
and sorrows, for the going down of sufferings and miseries, for 
winning the right path, for realising nibbana, 3 And, revered sir, 
we householders too, dressed in white, from time to time dwell with 
our minds well applied to the four applications of mindfulness. 4 * * 
As to this, revered sir, we fare along contemplating the body in the 
body ... the feelings in the feelings ... the mind in the mind 
. . . the mental states in the mental states, ardent, clearly 


1 santala-sila. Saniata , which MA. iii. 4 explains as nirantara, unin- 

terrupted, means consistent, stable. 

* See M . Sta. 10 (M.L£. i. 83) and D . Sta. 22. 3 As at M.L.S. i. 83. 

4 As they have various things to do for monks they cannot engage in the 

four applications of mindfulness all the time ; but when they get an opportunity 

they are able to do so, MA. iii. 6, 



I. 340-341 


To Kandaraka 


5 


conscious (of them), mindful (of them), so as to control the covetous- 
ness and dejection in the world. It is wonderful, revered sir, it is 
marvellous, revered sir, how the Lord knows the welfare and woe 
of beings while there is this human tangle, this human guile, this 
human treachery. For this 1 , revered sir, is a tangle, that is to say 
human beings. But this, revered sir, is an open clearing, that is to 
say animals. 2 Now I, revered sir, am able to make an elephant 
under training so remember that, every time he is coming into 
Campa or leaving it, he will display all kinds of treachery, deceit, 
fraud, trickery. But, revered sir, those that are called our slaves 
or messengers or workpeople, they do one thing with their body, 
another in speech, and their thought is still other. 3 It is wonderful, 
revered sir, it is marvellous, revered sir, how the Lord knows the 
welfare and woe of beings while there is this human tangle, this 
human guile, this human treachery. For this, revered sir, is a 
tangle, that is to say human beings. But this, revered sir, is an 
open clearing, that is to say animals.” 

“ It is so, Pessa, it is so, Pessa. [841] For this, Pessa, is a tangle, 
that is to say human beings. But this, Pessa, is an open clearing, 
that is to say animals. Pessa, these four kinds of persons are found 
in the world. 4 What four ? As to this, Pessa, some person is a 
self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self- torment; as to this, 
Pessa, some person is a tormentor of others, intent on the practice 
of tormenting others; as to this, Pessa, some person is both a self- 
tormentor, intent on the practice of tormenting self, and a tormentor 
of others, intent on the practice of tormenting others; as to this, 
Pessa, some person is neither a self-tormentor, not intent on the 
practice of self-torment, nor a tormentor of others, not intent on 
the practice of tormenting others. He, neither a self-tormentor 
nor a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, quenched, become 
cool, an experiencer of bliss 5 that lives with self Brahma-become. 
Of these four persons, Pessa, which appeals to your mind V* 

“ Now, revered sir, that person who is a self-tormentor, intent 
on the practice of self-torment — that person does not appeal to 
my mind. And, revered sir, that person who is a tormentor of 
others, intent on the practice of tormenting others — neither does 


1 Cited at DhA . i. 173. 2 All four-footed things, MA. iii. 7. 

2 Cf , . DhA. i. 173. 

* Cf. M. i. 411, ii. 159; D. iii. 234; A . ii. 205; Pug. 55. 

* MA. iii. 10, the “ blisses ” (happinesses, eases) of meditation, the Ways, 

the fruits, nibbana. 



6 


51. Kandarakasutla 


I. 341-342 


that person appeal to my mind. And, revered sir, that person who 
is a self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self-torment, and who 
is also a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting 
others — neither does that person appeal to my mind. But, revered 
sir, that person who is neither a self-tormentor, not intent on the 
practice of self-torment, nor a tormentor of others, not intent on 
the practice of tormenting others, he, neither a self-tormentor nor 
a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, 
an experiencer of bliss that lives with self Brahma-become — this 
person appeals to my mind. ,, 

“ But why, Pessa, do those three persons not appeal to your 
mind V 9 

14 Revered sir, whatever person is a self-tormentor, intent on the 
practice of self-torment, he mortifies and torments himself 1 although 
he yearns for happiness and recoils from pain. Therefore this 
person does not appeal to my mind. And, revered sir, whatever 
person is a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting 1 
others, he mortifies and torments others although they yearn for 
happiness and recoil from pain. Therefore this person does not 
appeal to my mind. And, revered sir, whatever person is both a 
self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self-torment, and also a 
tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting others, 
he mortifies and torments himself and others although they (all) 
yearn for happiness and recoil from pain. Therefore this person 
does not appeal to my mind. But, [342] revered sir, whatever 
person is neither a self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self- 
torment, nor a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of 
tormenting others, he, neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of 
others, is here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, an experiencer 
of bliss that lives with self Brahma-become. Therefore this person 
appeals to my mind. But, revered sir, we must be going, we are 
very busy, there is much to be done by us.” 

“ You must do, Pessa, whatever you think it is now the right 
time for.” 

Then Pessa, the son of the elephant-trainer, having rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said, having given thanks, rising from his 
seat, having greeted the Lord, departed keeping his right side 
towards him. Soon after Pessa, the son of the elephant-trainer, 
had departed, the Lord addressed the monks, saying: 


1 C/. JS . iv. 337 



I. 342-343 


To Kandaraka 


7 


“ Monks, Pessa, the son of the elephant-trainer, is clever 1 ; monks, 
Pessa, the son of the elephant-trainer, is of great wisdom. If, 
monks, Pessa, the elephant-trainer’s son, had sat down for a moment 
whilst I had analysed the four kinds of persons for him in detail, 
he would have gained great good. 2 Nevertheless, even to some 
extent has Pessa, the elephant-trainer’s son, gained great good/* 

“ It is the right time for this, Lord, 3 it is the right time for this, 
Wellfarer— for the Lord to analyse these four persons in detail. 
When the monks have heard the Lord, they will remember.” 

“ Well then, monks, listen, attend carefully, and I will speak.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” these monks answered the Lord in assent. 
The Lord spoke thus: 

“ And which, monks, is the self-tormentor, intent on the practice 
of self-torment? In this case, monks, some person comes to be 
unclothed, 4 flouting life’s decencies, licking his hands (after meals), 
not one to come when asked to do so, not one to stand still when 
asked to do so. He does not consent (to accept food) offered or 
specially prepared (for him) or (to accept) an invitation (to a meal). 
He does not accept (food) straight from a cooking-pot or pan, nor 
within the threshold, nor among the faggots, nor among the rice- 
pounders, nor when two people are eating, nor from a pregnant 
woman, nor from one giving suck, nor from one cohabiting with 
a man, nor from gleanings, nor from where a dog is standing by, nor 
where flies are swarming, nor fish, nor meat. He drinks neither 
fermented liquor nor spirits nor rice-gruel. He comes to be a 
one-house man or a one-piece man, or a two-house man or a two- 
piece man ... or a seven-house man or a seven-piece man. He 
subsists on one little offering . . . and he subsists on seven little 
offerings. He takes food only once a day, [343] and once in two 
days . . . and once in seven days. Then he lives intent on such a 
practice as eating rice at regular fortnightly intervals. He is one 
feeding on potherbs or feeding on millet or on wild rice or on snippets 
of leather or on water-plants or on the red powder of rice husks 
or on the discarded scum of rice on the boil or on the flour of oil- 


1 Not in regard to these four categories of persons, but in regard to the four 
applications of mindfulness, MA. iii. 10. 

1 mahatd atthena samyutto agatnissa. Siam, version has abhavissa for text's 
agamissa, and is supported by MA. iii, 10-11: sotapanno abhavissa . 

* bhagavd, as at M . i. 433. 

4 The remainder of this paragraph as at M . i. 77-78; A . ii. 205 ff. is similar 
to above from here to the end of this Discourse. 



8 


51. Kandarakasulta 


I. 343-344 


seeds or grass or cowdung. He is one who subsists on forest roots 
or fruits, eating the fruits that have fallen. He wears coarse hempen 
cloths and he wears mixed cloths or cerements or rags taken from 
the dust-heap or tree-bark fibre or antelope skins or strips of antelope 
skin or cloths of kusa-gm&$ or cloths of bark or cloths of wood 
shavings or a blanket of human hair or he wears owls’ feathers. 
He is one who plucks out the hair of his head and beard, intent on 
the practice of plucking out the hair of the head and beard ; and he is 
one who stands upright, refusing a seat; and he is one who squats 
on his haunches, intent on the practice of squatting; and he is one 
for covered thorns, he makes his bed on covered thorns; and he 
lives intent on the practice of going down to the water to bathe 
three times in an evening. Thus in many a way does he live intent 
on the practice of mortifying and tormenting his body. Monks, 
this is called the person who is a self-tormentor, intent on the 
practice of self-torment. 

And which, monks, is the person who is a tormentor of others, 
intent on the practice of tormenting others ? In this case, monks, 
some person is a cattle-butcher, or pig-killer, fowler, deer-stalker, 
hunter, fisherman, thief, executioner, jailer, or (one of) those others 
who follow a bloody calling. 1 This is the person, monks, who is 
called a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting 
others. 

And which, monks, is the person who is both a self-tormentor, 
intent on the practice of tormenting self, and also a tormentor 
of others, intent on the practice of tormenting others ? In this 
case, monks, some person is a noble anointed king or a very rich 
brahman. He, having had a new conference hall 2 built to the east 
of the town, having had his head and beard shaved, having put on 
a shaggy skin, having smeared his body with ghee and oil, scratching 
his back with a deer-hom, enters the conference hall together with 
his chief consort and a brahman priest. Then he lies down to sleep 
on the bare grassy ground. The king lives on the milk from one 
udder of a cow that has a calf of like colour, [344] his chief consort 
lives on the milk from the second udder, the brahman priest lives 
on the milk from the third udder, the milk from the fourth udder 
they offer to the fire ; the calf lives on what is over. He speaks thus : 
‘ Let so many bulls be slain for the sacrifice, let so many steers . . . 


1 Cf. A . iii. 383. 

2 aanthagdra . M A. iii. 12 says yaiinasdld , sacrificial hall. 



I. 344-345 


To Kandaraka 


9 


heifers , . . goats ... let so many rams be slain for the sacrifice, let 
so many trees be felled for the sacrificial posts, let so much kusa - 
grass be reaped for the sacrificial spot ,’ 1 Those who are called his 
slaves or messengers or workpeople, they, scared of the stick, 
scared of danger , 2 with tearful faces and crying, set about their 
preparations. This, monks, is called the person who is both a 
self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self-torment, and a tormentor 
of others, intent on the practice of tormenting others. 

And which, monks, is the person who is neither a self-tormentor, 
not intent on the practice of self-torment, nor a tormentor of others, 
not intent on the practice of tormenting others, and who, neither 
a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, 
quenched, become cool, an experiencer of bliss that lives with self 
Brahma-become ? In this case, monks, a Tathagata arises in the 
world , 3 a perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, endowed with 
(right) knowledge and conduct, well-farer, knower of the worlds, 
matchless charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of dems and 
mankind, the Awakened One, the Lord. Having realised it by his 
own super-knowledge, he proclaims this world with its dems , 
Maras, Brahmas, creation with its recluses and brahmans, with its 
dems and men. With the meaning and the spirit he teaches 
dhamma that is lovely at the beginning, lovely in the middle, lovely 
at the ending; he proclaims the Brahma-faring wholly fulfilled 
and purified. A householder or a householder’s son or one born 
in some respectable family hears that dhamma . When he has 
heard that dhamma he acquires faith in the Tathagata. Possessed 
of this faith he has acquired, he reflects thus: 4 Confined is this 
household life, a path of dust, while going forth is of the open air. 
Yet it is not easy for one who has lived in a house to fare the 
Brahma-faring completely fulfilled, completely purified, polished 
like a conch-shell. Yet suppose I were to have my hair and beard 
shaved, to don saffron robes, and go forth from home into homeless- 
ness V After a time, getting rid of his mass of wealth, whether 
large or small, [345] getting rid of his circle of relations, whether 
large or small, having had his hair and beard shaved, having donned 
saffron robes, he goes forth from home into homelessness. 

He, gone forth thus, being possessed of the way of life and the 

1 D. i. 141; A. ii. 207. 

* bhayatajjitd; cf. Dhp . 188. Tajjita also means “ spurred on by.” 

* From here to the end of this Discourse cf. M. i. 179 ff and see M.L.S. 

i. 235 ff. for notes. 



10 


51. Kandarakasutta 


I. 345 


training of monks, abandoning onslaught on creatures, is one that 
abstains from onslaught on creatures; stick and sword laid aside 
he dwells scrupulous, kindly, friendly and compassionate towards 
all living things and creatures. Abandoning the taking of what has 
not been given, he is one that abstains from taking what has not 
been given; taking (only) what is given, waiting for what is given, 
without stealing he dwells with self become pure. Abandoning 
unchastity, he is one that is chaste, keeping remote he is one that 
refrains 1 * * * from dealings with women. Abandoning lying speech, 
he is one that abstains from lying speech, a truth-speaker, a bonds- 
man to truth, trustworthy, dependable, no deceiver of the world. 
Abandoning slanderous speech, he is one that abstains from 
slanderous speech; having heard something here he is not one to 
repeat it elsewhere for (causing) variance among those people; or, 
having heard something elsewhere he is not one to repeat it here for 
(causing) variance among these people; concord is his pleasure, 
concord his delight, concord his joy, concord the motive of his 
speech. Abandoning harsh speech, he is one that abstains from 
harsh speech; whatever speech is gentle, pleasing to the ear, affec- 
tionate, going to the heart, urbane, pleasant to the manyfolk, 
agreeable to the manyfolk — he is one that utters speech like this. 
Abandoning frivolous chatter, he is one that abstains from frivolous 
chatter; he is a speaker at a right time, a speaker of fact, a speaker 
on the goal, a speaker on dhamma, a speaker on discipline, he speaks 
words that are worth treasuring, with an opportune simile, 8 dis- 
criminating, connected with the goal. He is one that abstains 
from what involves destruction to seed-growth, to vegetable growth. 
He is one that eats one meal a day, desisting at night, refraining 
from eating at a wrong time. He is one that abstains from watch- 
ing shows of dancing, singing, music. He is one that abstains 
from using garlands, scents, unguents, adornments, finery. He 
is one that abstains from using high beds, large beds. He is one 
that abstains from accepting gold and silver. He is one that 
abstains from accepting raw grain . . . raw meat . . . women and 
girls . . . women slaves and men slaves . . . goats and sheep . . . fowl 
and swine . . . elephants, cows, horses, mares . . . fields and sites. 
He is one that abstains from the practice of sending or going on 

1 virato. I have translated the more frequent pafivirato of this passage 

as “ one that abstains.” 

* sapadesa , explained at DA. i. 76 as sa-upama, sakdrana, with a simile, 

with a device (argument, supposition ?). 



I. 345-346 


To Kandaraka 


11 


messages. He is one that abstains from buying and selling . . . from 
cheating with weights, bronzes and measures. [ 346 ] He is one that 
abstains from the crooked ways of bribery, fraud and deceit. He 
is one that abstains from maiming, murdering, manacling, highway 
robbery. He is contented with a robe to protect his body, with 
almsfood to sustain his stomach. Wherever he goes he takes these 
things with him as he goes. As a bird on the wing wherever it 
flies takes its wings with it as it flies, so a monk, contented with a 
robe to protect his body, with almsfood to sustain his stomach, 
wherever he goes takes these things with him as he goes. He, 
possessed of this ariyan body of moral habit, inwardly experiences 
the bliss of blamelessness . 1 

Having seen a material shape with the eye, he is not entranced 
by the general appearance, he is not entranced by the detail. If 
he dwell with this organ of sight uncontrolled, covetousness and 
dejection, evil unskilled states of mind might predominate. So he 
fares along controlling it, he guards the organ of sight, he achieves 
control over the organ of sight. Having heard a sound with the 
ear. . . . Having smelt a smell with the nose. . . . Having savoured 
a taste with the tongue, . . . Having felt a touch with the body. , . . 
Having cognised a mental object with the mind, he is not entranced 
by the general appearance, he is not entranced by the detail. If 
he dwell with this organ of mind uncontrolled, covetousness and 
dejection, evil unskilled states of mind might predominate. So he 
fares along controlling it, he guards the organ of mind, he achieves 
control over the organ of mind. He, possessed of this ariyan 
control over the sense-organs, inwardly experiences the bliss of 
being ‘ unaffected .’ 2 

Whether he is setting out or returning, he is one who comports 
himself properly; whether he is looking down or looking round . . . 
whether he is bending back or stretching out (his arm) . . . whether 
he is carrying his outer cloak, his bowl, his robe . . . whether he is 
munching, drinking, eating, savouring . . . whether he is obeying 


1 anavajjasu kha , 

9 avydsekamkha , not sprinkled (with evil), not mixing with it. His control 
acts as a barrier to the flowing-in of impurity. At M,L.S. i, 227 I translated 
the compound as “ unsullied well-being.” I now think that the above 
translation better balances the “ bliss of bl&melessncsa ” at the end of the 
preceding paragraph, and that the two compounds ending in sukha are 
intentional. “ Unsullied well-being ” at vol. i, p. 226 is an error and should 
read “ bliss of blamelessness.” 



12 


51. Kandarakasutta 


I. 346-347 


the calls of nature . . . whether he is walking, standing, asleep, 
awake, talking, silent, he is one who comports himself properly. 

Possessed of this ariyan body of moral habit, possessed of this 
ariyan control over the sense-organs, and possessed of this ariyan 
mindfulness and clear consciousness, he chooses a remote lodging 
in a forest, at the root of a tree, on a mountain slope, in a wilderness, 
a hill-cave, a cemetery, a forest haunt, in the open air or on a heap 
of straw. Returning from alms-gathering after the meal, he sits 
down cross-legged holding the back erect, having made mindfulness 
rise up in front of him. [347] Having got rid of covetousness for 
the world, he lives with a mind devoid of coveting and purifies 
the mind of coveting. By getting rid of the taint of ill-will, he 
lives benevolent in mind; and, compassionate for the welfare of 
all creatures and beings, he purifies the mind of the taint of ill-will. 
By getting rid of sloth and torpor, he lives devoid of sloth and torpor ; 
perceiving the light, mindful and clearly conscious, he purifies the 
mind of sloth and torpor. By getting rid of restlessness and worry, 
he lives calmly, the mind inwardly tranquillised, and he purifies 
the mind of restlessness and worry. By getting rid of doubt, he 
lives doubt-crossed; unperplexed as to states that are skilled, he 
purifies the mind of doubt. 

“ He, by getting rid of these five hindrances — defilements of the 
mind and weakening to intuitive wisdom — aloof from pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the 
first meditation, which is accompanied by initial thought and dis- 
cursive thought, is born of aloofness and is rapturous and joyful. 
By allaying initial and discursive thought, the mind subjectively 
tranquillised and fixed on one point, he enters and abides in the 
second meditation, which is devoid of initial and discursive thought, 
is born of concentration and is rapturous and joyful. By the fading 
out of rapture, he dwells with equanimity, attentive and clearly 
conscious, and experiences in his person that joy of which the ariyans 
say: ‘ Joyful lives he who has equanimity and is mindful’, and he 
enters and abides in the third meditation. By getting rid of joy, by 
getting rid of anguish, by the going down of his former pleasures and 
sorrows, he enters and abides in the fourth meditation, which has 
neither anguish nor joy, and which is entirely purified by equanimity 
and mindfulness. 

Thus with the mind composed, 1 quite purified, quite clarified, 


1 A. ii. 211 omits this paragraph and the next. 



I. 347-348 


To Kandarala 


13 


without blemish, without defilement, grown soft and workable, stable, 
immovable, he directs his mind to the knowledge and recollection of 
former habitations. He recollects a variety of former habitations, 
thus: one birth, two births, three . . . four . . . five , . . ten . . . twenty 
. . . thirty . . . forty . . . fifty ... a hundred ... a thousand ... a 
hundred thousand births, and many an eon of integration and many 
an eon of disintegration and many an eon of integration-disinte- 
gration: ‘ Such a one was I by name, having such and such a clan, 
such and such a colour, so was I nourished, such and such pleasant 
and painful experiences were mine, so did the span of life end. 
Passing from this, I came to be in another state where I was such a 
one by name, having such and such a clan, such and such a colour, 
so was I nourished, such and such pleasant and painful experiences 
were mine, [348] so did the span of life end. Passing from this, I 
arose here.* Thus he recollects divers former habitations in all 
their modes and detail. 

With the mind composed thus, quite purified . . . fixed, immovable, 
he directs his mind to the knowledge of the passing hence and the 
arising of beings. With the purified deva-v ision surpassing that of 
men, he sees beings as they pass hence or come to be ; he comprehends 
that beings are mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going, 
according to the consequences of deeds, and thinks: ‘ Indeed these 
worthy beings who were possessed of wrong conduct in body, speech 
and thought, scoffers at the ariyans, holding a wrong view, incurring 
deeds consequent on a wrong view — these, at the breaking up of the 
body after dying, have arisen in a sorrowful state, a bad bourn, the 
abyss, Niraya Hell. But these worthy beings who were possessed of 
good conduct in body, speech and thought, who did not scoff at the 
ariyans, holding a right view, incurring deeds consequent on a right 
view — these at the breaking up of the body after dying, have arisen 
in a good bourn, a heaven world . 9 Thus with the purified deva- 
vision surpassing that of men does he see beings as they pass hence, as 
they arise ; he comprehends that beings are mean, excellent, comely, 
ugly, well-going, ill-going according to the consequences of deeds, 

With the mind composed thus . . . fixed, immovable, he directs his 
mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. He 
comprehends as it really is : This is anguish, this the arising of anguish, 
this the stopping of anguish, this the course leading to the stopping 
of anguish. He comprehends as it really is: These are the cankers, 
this the arising of the cankers, this the stopping of the cankers, this 
the course leading to the stopping of the cankers. Knowing 



14 


51. Kandarakasutta 


I. 348-349 


thus, seeing thus, his mind is freed from the canker of sense-pleasures 
and his mind is freed from the canker of becoming and his mind is 
freed from the canker of ignorance. In freedom the knowledge 
comes to be: I am freed; and he comprehends: Destroyed is birth, 
brought to a close the Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, 
there is no more of being such or so. 

This, monks, is called the person who is neither a self-tormentor 
intent on the practice of tormenting self, nor a tormentor of 
others intent on the practice of tormenting others. [ 349 ] He, 
neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now 
allayed, quenched, become cool, an experiencer of bliss that lives 
with self Brahma-become. ” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 

Discourse to Kandaraka: 

The First 


52. DISCOURSE TO A CITIZEN OF ATTHAKA 

(Atthakanagarasutta) 1 

Thus have I heard : At one time the venerable Ananda was staying 
near Vesall in Beluva hamlet. 2 Now at that time the householder 
Dasama of Atthaka had arrived in Pataliputta on some business or 
other. Then the householder Dasama of Atthaka approached a 
monk in Cock’s monastery 3 * ; having approached, having greeted 
that monk, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting 
down at a respectful distance the householder Dasama of Atthaka 
spoke thus to that monk: “ Revered sir, where is the venerable 
Ananda staying at present, for we are anxious to see the venerable 
Ananda V 9 

“ Householder, the venerable Ananda is staying near Vesall in 
Beluva hamlet. ” 


1 This Discourse is also at A. v. 342 j0f., and is there called Dasama Sutta, 
after the name of the householder. See the notes at Q.S . v. 219 ff. 

* On a slope of a hill to the south of Vesall, MA . iii. 12= Corny, on A . 

3 MA . iii. 13 says it was made by a seUhi, a rich man, banker or merchant, 

called Kukkuta (Cock). 



I* 349-350 To a Citizen of Atthaka 15 

Then the householder Dasama of Atthaka, having concluded his 
business in Pataliputta, approached the venerable Ananda in Beluva 
hamlet; having approached, having greeted the venerable Ananda, 
he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down at a 
respectful distance, the householder Dasama of Atthaka spoke thus 
to the venerable Ananda: 

“ Now is there, revered Ananda, any one thing pointed out by that 
Lord who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, 
whereby if a monk dwell diligent, ardent, self-resolute, his mind, not 
(yet) freed, is freed; or the cankers, not (yet) completely destroyed, 
go to complete destruction; or he attains the matchless security from 
the bonds, not (yet) attained?” 

“ There is one thing, householder, pointed out by that Lord . . . 
fully Self-Awakened One, [850] whereby if a monk dwell diligent, 
ardent, self-resolute, his mind not (yet) freed, is freed ; and also the 
cankers, not (yet) completely destroyed, go to complete destruction; 
and, too, he attains the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) 
attained.” 

“ But what, revered Ananda, is this one thing pointed out by the 
Lord . . . whereby if a monk dwell diligent ... he attains the match- 
less security from the bonds, not (yet) attained ?” 

“ As to this, householder, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the 
first meditation, which is accompanied by initial thought and dis- 
cursive thought, is bom of aloofness and is rapturous and joyful. He 
•reflects on this and comprehends: ‘ This first meditation is effected 
and thought out. 1 But whatever is effected and thought out, that is 
impermanent, it is liable to stopping/ Firm in this, he attains the 
destruction of the cankers. If he does not attain the destruction of 
the cankers, then by this attachment to dhamma , by this delight in 
dhamma , by the destruction of the five fetters binding to this lower 
(shore), he is of spontaneous uprising, one who attains nibbana there, 
not liable to return from that world. This, householder, is one thing 

pointed out by the Lord . . , whereby, if a monk dwell diligent ... he 
attains the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk, by allaying initial and discursive 
thought . . . enters on and abides in the second meditation. He 
reflects on this and comprehends: ‘ This second meditation is also 
effected and thought out . : . impermanent, it is liable to stopping/ 


1 abhimnkhatam abhimncetayitam. 



16 52. Althahanagarasutta I. 350-352 

Firm in this he attains destruction of the cankers . . . one who attains 
nibbana there, not liable to return from that world. This too, 
householder, is one thing pointed out by that Lord . . . [ 351 ] . . . 
whereby if a monk dwell diligent ... he attains the matchless security 
from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk, by the fading out of rapture . . . 
enters and abides in the third meditation. He reflects on this and 
comprehends: ‘ This third meditation is also effected and thought 
out. But whatever is effected and thought out, that is impermanent, 
it is liable to stopping/ Firm in this ... he attains the matchless 
security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And egain, householder, a monk, by getting rid of joy, by getting 
rid of anguish, . . . enters and abides in the fourth meditation. He 
reflects on this and comprehends: ‘ This fourth meditation is also 
effected and thought out. But whatever is effected and thought out, 
that is impermenent, it is liable to stopping/ Firm in this ... he 
attains the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk dwells having suffused the first 
quarter with a mind of friendliness; likewise the second, likewise the 
third, likewise the fourth; just so above, below, across; he dwells 
having suffused the whole world everywhere, in every way, with a 
mind of friendliness that is far-reaching, wide-spread, immeasurable, 
without enmity, without malevolence. He reflects on this and com- 
prehends: ‘ This freedom of mind that is friendliness is also effected 
and thought out. But whatever is effected and thought out, that 
is impermanent, it is liable to stopping/ Firm in this ... he attains 
the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk dwells having suffused the first 
quarter with a mind of compassion . . . with a mind of sympathetic 
joy . . . with a mind of equanimity; likewise the second, likewise the 
third, likewise the fourth; just so above, below, across; he dwells 
having suffused the whole world everywhere, in every way, with a 
mind of compassion ... of sympathetic joy ... of equanimity that is 
far-reaching, wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, without 
malevolence. He reflects on this and comprehends : ‘ This freedom of 
mind that is compassion . . . sympathetic joy . . . equanimity is also 
effected and thought out. But whatever is effected and thought out, 
that is impermanent, [ 352 ] it is liable to stopping/ Firm in this . . . 
he attains the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk, by wholly transcending per- 
ceptions of material shapes, by the going down of perceptions due to 



I, 352-353 To a Citizen of Atthaka 17 

sensory impressions, by not reflecting on perceptions of multiformity, 
thinking * Ether 1 * * is unending 5 , entering on, abides in the plane of 
infinite ether. He reflects on this and comprehends: 4 This attain- 
ment of the plane of infinite ether is also effected and thought out. 
But whatever is effected and thought out, that is impermanent, it is 
liable to stopping. Firm in this ... he attains the matchless security 
from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk, by wholly transcending the plane 
of infinite ether, thinking 4 Consciousness is unending \ entering on, 
abides in the plane of infinite consciousness. He reflects on this and 
comprehends : 4 This attainment of the plane of infinite consciousness 
is also effected and thought out. What is effected and thought out, 
that is impermanent, it is liable to stopping.’ Firm in this ... he 
attains the matchless security from the bonds, not (yet) attained. 

And again, householder, a monk, by wholly transcending the plane 
of infinite consciousness, thinking 4 There is no-thing,’ entering on, 
abides in the plane of no- thing. He reflects on this and comprehends : 

4 This attainment of the plane of no-thing is also effected and thought 
out. But whatever is effected and thought out , that is impermanent, 
it is liable to stopping.’ Firm in this, he attains the destruction of 
the cankers. If he does not attain the destruction of the cankers, 
then by this attachment to dhamma , by this delight in dhamma, by 
the destruction of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore), he is 
of spontaneous uprising, one who attains nibbana there, not liable to 
return from that world. This, householder, is one thing pointed out 
by that Lord who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened 
One, whereby if a monk dwell diligent, ardent, self-resolute, his mind, 
not (yet) freed, is freed; and the cankers, not (yet) completely 
destroyed, go to complete destruction; and he attains the matchless 
security from the bonds, not (yet) attained.” 

When this had been said, the householder Dasama of Atthaka 
spoke thus to the venerable Ananda : 44 Revered Ananda, it is as 
though a man who was seeking for one opening to (some hidden) 
treasure were to come at one and the same time on eleven openings 
to the treasure. [ 358 ] Even so do I, revered sir, in seeking for one 


1 As I ufced “ ether ” for dkdsa in vol. i, I retain it in this volume, although 

“ ether,” for science, no longer means the substratum or ultimate matter 

out of which come all solids, liquids, gases, etc. Nor is dkdsa “ space " in 

such contexts as the above; it is, however, as is nitibana, in some sense an 
absolute, for neither of the two is bom of kamma , of cause, or of nature, 

M ihu 268. 



18 52. AUhakandgarasutta I. 353 

door to the deathless come to hear 1 at one and the same time of 
eleven doors to the deathless. And too, revered sir, it is like a man’s 
house that has eleven doors; if his house were on fire he could make 
himself safe by any one of the doors. Even so can I, revered sir, 
make myself safe by any one of these eleven doors to the deathless. 
Now, revered sir, members of other sects will look about for a fee for 
the teacher, but why should not I pay honour to the venerable 
Ananda ?” 

Then the householder Dasama of At^haka, having had the Order 
of monks that was at Pataliputta and Vesal! gathered together, with 
his own hand served and satisfied them with sumptuous foods, solid 
and soft, and presented each monk with a separate pair of cloths; to 
the venerable Ananda he presented a set of three robes and had a 
dwelling-place 2 that cost five hundred pieces built for the venerable 
Ananda. 

Discourse to a Citizen of Atthaka : 

The Second 


53. DISCOURSE FOR LEARNERS 

(Sekhasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord 3 was staying among the 
Sakyans near Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha’s monastery. Now at that 
time a new conference hall had not long been built for the Sakyans of 
Kapilavatthu, and had never (yet) been occupied by a recluse or 
brahman or any human being. Then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu 
approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, 
they sat down at a respectful distance. As they were sitting down 
at a respectful distance, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu spoke thus to 
the Lord: 

“ Lord, there is a new conference hall here, built not long ago for 
the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu, which has never (yet) been occupied 
by a recluse or brahman or any human being. Lord, let the Lord 
be the first to use it. When the Lord has used it first, the Sakyans 

1 savandya (for the hearing of) ; A. v, 346 reads sevanaya (for entering in by), 
with v.l. savandya . 

1 M A, iii. 16, says a pannasald , a leaf hut (or, hall). 

* 3. iv, 182-3. At D. iii. 207 ff, the scene is laid among the Mallas of P*vS. 



I. 353-354 


For Learners 


19 


of Kapilavatthu will use it afterwards, and for a long time that will 
be for the welfare and happiness of the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.” 1 

[354] The Lord consented by becoming silent. Then the Sakyans 
of Kapilavatthu, having understood the Lord’s consent, rising from 
their seats, having greeted the Lord, approached the conference hall 
keeping their right sides towards him. Having approached, having 
spread the conference hall with all the spreadings, 2 having got seats 
ready, having set out a water vessel, having hung up an oil lamp, 
they approached the Lord ; having approached and greeted the Lord, 
they stood at a respectful distance. As they were standing at a 
respectful distance, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

“ Lord, the conference hall has been spread with all the spreadings, 
seats have been got ready, a water vessel set out, an oil lamp hung 
up. Let the Lord now do that for which he thinks it is the right 
time.” When the Lord had dressed, taking his bowl and robe, he 
approached the conference hall together with an Order of monks; 
having approached, he washed his feet, entered the conference hall 
and sat down against the middle pillar, facing the east. The Order 
of monks also washed their feet, entered the conference hall and sat 
down against the western wall, facing the east with the Lord in front 
of them. The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu also washed their feet, 
entered the conference hall and sat down against the eastern wall, 
facing the west with the Lord in front of them. Then the Lord, 
having gladdened, roused, incited, delighted the Sakyans of Kapil- 
avatthu with reasoned talk far into the night, addressed the venerable 
Ananda, 3 saying: 

“ Ananda, let there occur to you a learner’s course 4 for the Sakyans 
of Kapilavatthu; my back is aching, I will stretch it.” 


1 Cf. RV. VIII. 17. 14, “ Strong pillar thou. Lord of the home !” 

* sabbasantharirh santhdgdram santharitva . On santhata , p*p. of santharali, 
see B.D. ii. p. xxi ff . ; and on v.ll. of santharitva in this connection see D. iii, 

208, n. 5. The reading should probably be 6antharaptlva as in D. 

3 Ananda was a learned expert in the three Pitakas, and was able to speak 
of the three (parts of the) training by means of them: the Vinaya spoken for 
speaking of the higher morality, the Sutta-pitaka for speaking of the higher 
thought, and the Abhidhamma-pitaka for speaking of the higher wisdom, 
MA. iii. 28. These three branches of the whole training are all mentioned in 
this Discourse. 

4 Sekko patipado . Cf . A. ii. 86 (bhikkhu seJcho hoti patipado , and where 
it would seem that pdli- is “ the more correct,’* O . S. ii. 06, ». 2)> and Iti. 
p. 80, (sdvako • . . patipado pi sekho). 



20 


53. Sekhasutta 


I, 354-355 


“ Yes, revered sir,” the venerable Ananda answered the Lord in 
assent. Then the Lord, having folded his outer robe into four, lay 
down on his right side in the lion posture, foot resting on foot, 
mindful, clearly conscious, reflecting on the thought of getting up 
again. Then the venerable Ananda addressed Mahanama the 
Sakyan 1 , saying: 

" Now, Mahanama, a disciple of the ariyans is possessed of moral 
habit, he is one who guards the doors of the sense-organs, he is 
moderate in eating, intent on vigilance, possessed of the seven 
excellent things, 2 one who acquires at will, 3 without trouble, without 
difficulty, the four meditations which are of the purest mentality, 
abidings in ease here and now. 4 * And how, [355] Mahanama, is an 
ariyan disciple possessed of moral habit P As to this, Mahanama, 
an ariyan disciple is moral; 6 he lives controlled by the control of the 
Obligations, possessed of (right) behaviour and resort, seeing danger 
in the slightest faults; undertaking them rightly, he trains in the 
rules of training. It is thus, Mahanama, that an ariyan disciple is 
possessed of moral habit. 

And how, Mahanama, is an ariyan disciple one who guards the 
doors of the sense-organs P As to this, Mahanama, an ariyan 
disciple, having seen a material shape with the eye, is not entranced 
by the general appearance, is not entranced by the detail. For if he 
dwell with the organ of sight uncontrolled, covetousness and dejec- 
tion, evil unskilled states of mind, might predominate. So he fares 
along controlling it, he guards the organ of sight; he achieves control 
over the organ of sight. Having heard a sound with the ear . , , 
Having smelt a smell with the nose . . . Having savoured a taste with 
the tongue . . . Having felt a touch with the body . . . Having cognised 
a mental state with the mind, he is not entranced by the general 


1 MA. iii. 29 says he was chief and head of the company at that time. 

* saddhammchi; MA, ill. 29 reads sunda radhammehi saiarh va mppurisam 
dhammehu AA. iv. explains saddhammehi by suddhammehi . With this 
paragraph c/. A. iv. 108 /. 

* See M, i. 33. 

4 This phrase also at A . ii. 23, 36, etc. See P.T.C s.v. abhicetasika. 

* MA. iii. 29 refers to the Akankheyya Suita (M. Sta. 6), etc. See also 
M. Sta. 107. 

4 silavant . Cf. Samannaphalasuttanta, §§ 43-62, each of which ends by 
saying: idarh pi 'ssa hoti sllasmim, a phrase to be compared with * darn pi 
'ssa hoti caranasmim . . . vijjaya, M this is so of him in regard to conduct . . . 
knowledge ” on p. 24 below. 
f Cf. M . i. 180 ( M.L.S. i. 226). 



I. 355-356 


For Learners 


21 


appearance, is not entranced by the detail If he dwell with the 
organ of mind uncontrolled, covetousness and dejection, evil un- 
skilled states, might predominate. So he fares along controlling it, 
he guards the organ of mind ; he achieves control over the organ of 
mind. It is thus, Mahanama, that an ariyan disciple is one who 
guards the doors of the sense-organs. 

And how, Mahanama, is an ariyan disciple one who is moderate in 
eating ? l As to this, Mahanama, an ariyan disciple takes food 
reflecting carefully, not for fun or indulgence or personal charm or 
beautification, but just enough for maintaining this body and keeping 
it going, for keeping it unharmed, for furthering the Brahma-faring, 
with the thought: * Thus will I crush out an old feeling, and I will not 
allow a new feeling to arise, and then there will be for me subsistence 
and blamelessness and abiding in comfort.’ It is thus, Mahanama, 
that an ariyan disciple is moderate in eating. 

And how, Mahanama, is an ariyan disciple intent on vigilance ? 2 
As to this, Mahanama, an ariyan disciple during the day, while 
pacing up and down and while sitting down, cleanses his mind of 
obstructive mental states ; during the first watch of the night, pacing 
up and down, sitting down, he cleanses his mind of obstructive 
mental states; during the middle watch of the night, he lies down on 
his right side in the lion posture, foot resting on foot, mindful, clearly 
conscious, reflecting on the thought of getting up again ; during the 
last watch of the night, when he has risen, while pacing up and down, 
while sitting down, he cleanses his mind of obstructive mental states. 
It is thus, Mahanama, that an ariyan disciple is intent on vigilance. 

And how, Mahanama, [356] is an ariyan disciple possessed of the 
seven excellent things ? 3 As to this, Mahanama, the ariyan disciple 
is of faith ; 4 he has faith in the awakening of the Tathagata, and 
thinks: He is indeed Lord, perfected one, fully Self- A wakened One, 
endowed with right knowledge and conduct, well-farer, knower of the 
world(s), matchless charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of devas 
and men, the Awakened One, the Lord. 

He comes to have shame ; he is ashamed of wrong conduct in body, 
of wrong conduct in speech, of wrong conduct in thought, he is 
ashamed to fall into evil unskilled mental states. 

He has fear of blame ; he fears blame for wrong conduct in body 
. . . speech . . . thought, he fears blame for falling into evil unskilled 
mental states. 

1 As at if. i. 273L ~~~» As at if. i. 2lJ. 

• Of. if. iii. 23; D. iii. 252, 282; A. iv. 108#. 4 Cf. S. v. 196. * 



22 


53. Sekhasutta 


I. 356-357 


He is one who has heard much, who remembers what he has heard, 
who stores up what he has heard. Those things, lovely in the begin- 
ning, lovely in the middle, lovely at the ending which, with the 
meaning and the spirit, declare the Brahma-faring wholly fulfilled, 
perfectly purified, such things are much heard by him, borne in mind, 
familiarised by speech, pondered over in the mind, well penetrated by 
right view. 1 

He dwells with stirred up energy 2 for getting rid of unskilled mental 
states, for acquiring skilled mental states, steadfast, firm in advance, 
persevering amid skilled mental states. 

He is mindful, 3 possessed of the highest mindfulness and discrimina- 
tion, 4 remembering, recollecting 5 what he has done and said long ago. 

He is one of wisdom, 6 endowed with wisdom leading to (the 
cutting off of) rise and fall, with the ariyan penetration leading to the 
complete destruction of anguish. It is thus, Mahanama, that an 
ariyan disciple is possessed of the seven excellent things. 

And how, Mahanama, is an ariyan disciple one who acquires at 
will, without trouble, without difficulty, the four meditations which 
are of the purest mentality, abidings in ease here and now P As to 
this, Mahanama, an ariyan disciple, aloof from pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the 
first meditation, which is accompanied by initial thought and dis- 
cursive thought, is bom of aloofness and is rapturous and joyful. 
By allaying initial and discursive thought, with the mind subjec- 
tively tranquillised and fixed on one point, he enters and abides in 
the second meditation which is devoid of initial and discursive 
thought, is bom of concentration and is rapturous and joyful ... he 
enters and abides in the third meditation . . . the fourth meditation. 
It is thus, Mahanama, that an ariyan disciple is one who acquires at 
will, without trouble, without difficulty, the four meditations which 
are of the purest mentality, abidings in ease here and now. 

When, Mahanama, an ariyan disciple is endowed with moral habit 
thus, is one who guards the doors of his sense-organs thus, is moderate 
in eating thus, is intent on vigilance thus, is endowed with the seven 
excellent things thus, [357] is one who acquires thus at will, without 
trouble, without difficulty, the four meditations which are of the 

1 Cf. M. iii. 11. 8 Cf. M . ii. 95, 8. v. 197, A. iii. 11, iv. 3, Ud . 37. 

8 Cf. 8. v. 197, A. iii. 11. 4 nepakka , see Vbh. 249. 

6 MA. iii. 30 distinguishes saying that sarita (remembering) is remembering 

once, anussariia (recollecting) is remembering again and again. 

• Cf. M. ii, 95. 7 Cf. A. ii. 22/., iii. 131, iv. 108 ff. 



I. 357-358 


For Learners 


23 


purest mentality, abidings in ease here and now, then he, Mahanama, 
is called an ariyan disciple who is on a learner’s course, possessed of 
(mental) soundness, he becomes one for successful breaking through, 1 
he becomes one for self-awakening, he becomes one for winning the 
matchless security from the bonds. Mahanama, it is as if there 
were eight or ten or a dozen hen’s eggs, properly sat on, properly 
incubated, properly hatched by that hen; such a wish as this would 
not arise in that hen; 4 0 may my chicks, having pierced through the 
egg-shell with the point of the claw on their feet or with their beaks, 
break forth safely,’ for these chicks were ones who were able to break 
forth safely having pierced the egg-shells with the point of the claw 
on their feet or with their beaks. Even so, Mahanama, when an 
ariyan disciple is endowed with moral habit thus, is one who guards 
the doors of his sense-organs thus, is moderate in eating thus, is 
intent on vigilance thus, is endowed with the seven excellent things 
thus, is one who acquires thus at will, without trouble, without 
difficulty the four meditations which are of the purest mentality, 
abidings in ease here and now, then he, Mahanama, is called an 
ariyan disciple who is on a learner’s course, possessed of (mental) 
soundness, he becomes one for successful breaking through, he 
becomes one for self-awakening, he becomes one for winning the 
matchless security from the bonds. That ariyan disciple, Mahanama, 
having come to this matchless purification through equanimity and 
mindfulness, 2 recollects a variety of former habitations, that is to say 
one birth, two births . . . Thus in all their mode and detail he 
recollects a variety of former habitations. This is his first breaking 
through as a chick’s from the egg-shell. 

Then this ariyan disciple, Mahanama, having come to this match- 
less purification through equanimity and mindfulness, with the purified 
dew-vision surpassing that of men, sees beings as they are passing 
hence and uprising, mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going 
, . . he comprehends beings according to the consequences of deeds. 
This is his second breaking through as a chick’s from the egg-shell. 

Then this ariyan disciple, Mahanama, having come to this match- 
less purification through equanimity and mindfulness, by the 
destruction of the cankers having liere-now realised by his own 
super-knowledge the freedom of mind and the freedom through 
intuitive wisdom that are cankerless, [358] enters and abides therein. 
This is his third breaking through as a chick’s from the egg-shell. 

1 /.€. from ignorance to knowledge, from darkness to light. Cf. M. i. 104. 

8 In the fourth meditation. See also below, p. 31. 



24 


53. Sckhasutta 


I. 358 


Whatever ariyan disciple, Mahanama, is possessed of moral habit, 
this is so of him in regard to conduct. 1 And, Mahanama, whatever 
ariyan disciple is guarded as to the doors of his sense-organs, this too 
is so of him in regard to conduct. And, Mahanama, whatever 
ariyan disciple is moderate in eating ... is intent on vigilance ... is 
possessed of the seven excellent things . . . acquires at will, without 
trouble, without difficulty, the four meditations that are of the 
purest mentality, abidings in ease here and now, this too is so of him 
in regard to conduct. But, Mahanama, whatever ariyan disciple in 
many a figure recollects his former habitations, that is to say one 
birth, two births . . . that is so of him in regard to knowledge. 8 And, 
Mahanama, whatever ariyan disciple, by the purified dew-vision 
surpassing that of men, sees beings as they are passing hence and 
uprising, mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going . . . who 
comprehends beings according to the consequences of deeds, this too 
is so of him in regard to knowledge. And, Mahanama, whatever 
ariyan disciple, by the destruction of the cankers, having realised 
here and now by his own super-knowledge the freedom of mind and 
the freedom through wisdom that are cankerless, enters and abides 
therein, this too is so of him in regard to knowledge. 3 Mahanama, 
this ariyan disciple is said to be possessed of knowledge and to be 
possessed of (right) conduct and to be possessed of knowledge and 
(right) conduct. And, Mahanama, this verse was spoken by 
Brahma Ever- Young: 4 

‘ The noble warrior is best among those people who value clan; 

He who is possessed of knowledge and (right) conduct is the best 
of devas and men.’ 6 

Mahanama, this verse was rightly sung, not wrongly sung by 
Brahma Ever- Young; it was rightly spoken, not wrongly spoken; it 
is connected with the goal, not connected with what is not the goal. 
It is approved by the Lord.” 

Then the Lord, having risen, addressed the venerable Ananda, 

1 carana . 2 vijja. On vijjacarana see A. ii. 163, v. 326 /.; and Vism . 202. 

3 Cf. the fifteen things (dhamma) given at Vism. 202 in its definition of 
carana, “ conduct,” The implied idea of movement in the word carana is 
also made explicit at Vism. 202: “ these very fifteen things are those by which 
an ariyan disciple walks (carati, fares, moves) and goes to the deathless 
quarter.” Cf. also the fifteen factors (anga) at M. i. 303, 304. The three 
knowledges are meant here according to MA . iii. 33, and also, as Vism. 202 
notices, in the Bhayabheravasutta (M. Sta. 4), but eight are spoken of in the 
AmbaUhasutia (. D . i. 100). * Sanahkumira. See Chand. Up. Ch. VII. 

• D. i. 99; iii. 97; S. i. 153, ii. 284; A. v. 327. 



I. 358-359 


For Learners 


25 


saying: “ It is good, it is good, Ananda; it is good that you, Ananda, 
spoke on a learner’s course to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu.” 

[859] Thus spoke the venerable Ananda, the Teacher approving. 
Delighted, the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu rejoiced in what the 
venerable Ananda had said. 

Discourse for Learners : 

The Third 


54. DISCOURSE TO POT ALIY A 

(Potaliyasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Arigut- 
tarapa. 1 Apa$a 2 was a market town in Anguttarapa. Then the 
Lord, having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, 
entered Apana for almsfood. When he had walked for almsfood in 
Apana and was returning from the alms-gathering after the meal, he 
approached a certain forest-thicket for the day-sojourn; and having 
plunged into that forest-thicket he sat down at the root of a tree. 
And the householder Potaliya, 3 who was constantly pacing up and 
down and roaming about on foot, fully dressed 4 and clothed, 4 with 
parasol and slippers, approached that forest-thicket; having plunged 
into that forest-thicket, he approached the Lord ; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance. Then the 
Lord spoke thus to the householder Potaliya as he was standing at a 
respectful distance: “ There are seats, householder; if you wish, do 
sit down.” When this had been said, the householder Potaliya 
thinking: “The recluse Gotama addresses me with the word 
‘ householder ’ ”, angry, displeased, became silent. And a second 
time the Lord spoke thus to the householder Potaliya: “ There are 

1 MA. iii. 34, Ariga was a district. Not far north of the waters of the river 
Mahf, there was Uttarapa. Ahguttarapa mentioned at M. i. 447, Yin. L 243, 
Sn. p. 102. 

* So called because it had many shops and bazaars, MA. iii. 37. 

* He possibly became the wanderer Potaliya, of A. ii. 100/. 

4 nivasa and patmrana refer to putting on of different garments (or cloths), 
the former to the loin-cloth or under garment, and the latter to the shoulder- 
cloth or outer garment. MA. iii. 38 distinguishes between these two cloths 
(the attire of the ordinary Indian), and says the former had a long fringe. 



26 54. Potaliyasutta I. 359-360 

seats, householder ; if you wish, do sit down.’ * And a second time the 
householder Potaliya thinking: “ The recluse Gotama addresses me 
with the word * householder ’ angry, displeased, became silent. 
And a third time the Lord spoke thus to the householder Potaliya: 
u There are seats, householder; if you wish, do sit down.” When 
this had been said, the householder Potaliya thinking: “ The recluse 
Gotama addresses me with the word ‘ householder * ”, angry, 
displeased, spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ This, [360] good Gotama, is not proper, it is not suitable, that 
you should address me with the word ‘ householder.’ ” 

“ But you, householder, have all the characteristic marks and 
signs of a householder.” 

“ But all relevant occupations have been abandoned by me, 
good Gotama, all avocations given up.” 

“But, householder, how have all occupations been abandoned by 
you, all avocations given up ?” 

“ As to this, good Gotama, I handed over to my sons as their 
inheritance all that I had of wealth or grain or silver or gold. With- 
out giving advice or blame in these matters I live on a minimum of 
food and covering. 1 This is how all occupations have been aban- 
doned by me, good Gotama, all avocations given up.” 

“ But what you, householder, call a giving up of avocations is one 
thing; but in the discipline for an ariyan the giving up of avocations 
is another thing.” 

“ And what, revered sir, is the giving up of avocations in the 
discipline for an ariyan ? It would be good, revered sir, if the Lord 
were to teach me dhamma as to that which is the giving up of 
avocations in the discipline for an ariyan.” 

“ Well then, householder, listen, attend carefully and I will speak.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” the householder Potaliya answered the Lord in 
assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

“ Householder, these eight things conduce to the giving up of 
avocations in the discipline for an ariyan. 2 What eight ? Through 
no onslaught on creatures, onslaught on creatures should be got rid of ; 
through taking what is given, taking what is not given should be got 
rid of; through speaking truth, lying speech should be got rid of; 
through unslanderous speech, slanderous speech should be got rid of; 
through non-covetise and greed, covetise and greed should be got rid 
of; through no angry fault-finding, angry fault-finding should be got 


1 Cf . D. i. 60. * C/. M. iii. 29; Vin . iv. 2; D. iii. 232; A . ii. 246, iv. 307. 



I. 360-364 


27 


To Potaliya 

rid of ; through no wrathful rage, wrathful rage should be got rid of ; 
through no arrogance, arrogance should be got rid of. These are the 
eight things, householder, spoken of in brief, not explained in detail, 
that, in the discipline for an ariyan, conduce to the giving up of 
avocations.” 

“ As to these eight things, revered sir, which are spoken of in brief, 
not explained in detail, and which, in the discipline for an ariyan, 
conduce to the giving up of avocations, it were good, revered sir, if 
the Lord out of compassion were to explain these eight things to me 
in detail.” 

“Well then, householder, listen, attend carefully and I will speak.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” the householder Potaliya answered the Lord 
in assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

[361] “ When I said : ‘ Through no onslaught on creatures, on- 
slaught on creatures should be got rid of ’—in reference to what was 
this said ? As to this, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: 

‘ I am faring along for getting rid of and abandoning those fetters of 
which onslaught on creatures might be a cause; for if I were to make 
onslaught on creatures, not only would self upbraid me as a result of 
making onslaught on creatures, but intelligent men (also) after 
scrutinising, would blame me 1 * * * * * * as a result of making onslaught on 
creatures; and at the breaking up of the body after dying a bad 
bourne would be expected as a result of making onslaught on 
creatures. This is indeed a fetter, this is a hindrance, that is to say 
onslaught on creatures. But for one who refrains from onslaught 
on creatures there are not those destructive and consuming cankers 8 
that might arise as a result of making onslaught on creatures.’ 
When I said : * Through no onslaught on creatures, onslaught on 
creatures should be got rid of,’ it was said in reference to this.” 

(The other seven things are spoken of in exactly the same terms , pp. 
362, 363.) 

[364] “ These, householder, are the eight things spoken of in brief, 
(now) explained in detail, that, in the discipline for an ariyan, 
conduce to the giving up of avocations. But not even yet in the 


1 atta pi m&ih upavadeyya anuvicca vinnu garaheyyuth; cf . A. i. 57, iii. 255, 

267-8, aU reading atta pi attdnarh upavadati . See Q.S. i. 52, n. 3 on anuvicca, 

translated above as “ scrutinising,” following MA. iii. 40 which explains by 

tvlayiiva pariyogahetva , having weighed, having scrutinised (or examined). 

* MA . iii. 40-42 states which single canker arises, or which two or which 

three arise, out of the total of four, for each one of the eight things so long as 

these have not been extirpated. 



28 54. Potaliyasutta I. 364 

discipline for an ariyan is there an entire giving up in every way of 
all avocations.” 

“ But how is it, revered sir, in the discipline for an ariyan there is 
an entire giving up in every way of all avocations ? It were good, 
revered sir, if the Lord were to teach me dhamma as to how, in the 
discipline for an ariyan, there is an entire giving up in every way of 
all avocations.” 

“ Well then, householder, listen, attend carefully and I will 
speak. M 

“ Yes, revered sir,” the householder Potaliya answered the Lord 
in assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

“ It is, householder, as if a dog, overcome by hunger and ex- 
haustion 1 were to happen on a slaughtering place for cows, and the 
skilled cattle-butcher there or his apprentice were to fling him a bone, 
scraped and well scraped, fleshless, but with a smearing of blood. 
What do you think about this, householder ? Could that dog, 
gnawing such a bone, scraped and well scraped, fleshless, but with a 
smearing of blood, appease his hunger and exhaustion V 9 

“ No, revered sir. What is the reason for this ? That bone, 
revered sir, is scraped and well scraped, fleshless, but although it has 
a smearing of blood, that dog would be worn out with fatigue or 
ever he got anything from it.” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: 1 Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened to a skeleton 2 by the Lord, of much 
pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril/ And having seen 
this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdom, having avoided 3 
that which is equanimity in face of multiformity, 4 * resting on multi- 
formity, he develops that equanimity which is equanimity in face of 
uniformity, resting on uniformity, wherein all graspings after the 
material things of the world are stopped entirely. 

And, householder, it is as if a vulture or kite or hawk seizing a 
lump of flesh were to fly upwards, and other vultures, kites and hawks 
following hard after it were to tear at it and pull it to pieces, 6 What 
do you think about this, householder ? If that vulture or kite or 


1 Cf. if. i. 114. 

* Cf . M. i. 130. For the following things to which pleasures of the senses 
are likened, see B.D . iii. 22/. ( Vin . iv. 134) and notes. 

3 abhinivajjetvd, as at if. i. Ill; D. iii. 113. 

4 Cf . M. iii. 220, “ Multiformity ” consists of the five sensual qualities, 

“ uniformity ” of the four jhdnas, MA . iii, 43. 

8 Cf. Fin. iii. 105; S. ii. 255. 



I. 364-365 To Potaliya 29 

hawk were not to let go quickly of that lump of flesh, would it, from 
that cause, come to death or pain like unto death ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: * Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened to a lump of flesh 1 by the Lord, of 
much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril/ [365] And 
having seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdom, 
having avoided that which is equanimity in face of multiformity 
... he develops that equanimity which is equanimity in face of 
uniformity . . , material things of the world are stopped entirely. 

And, householder, it is as though a man might come along bringing 
a blazing grass torch 2 against the wind. What do you think about 
this, householder ? If that man were not to let go quickly of that 
blazing grass torch, would it bum his hand or burn his arm or burn 
another part of his body so that, from that cause, he would come to 
death or pain like unto death V * 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus : < Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened by the Lord to a grass torch, 3 of much 
pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril/ And having seen 
this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdon, having avoided 
, . . the material things of the world are stopped entirely. 

And, householder, it is as if there might be a pit of glowing embers, 
deeper than a man's height, full of embers that were neither flaming 
nor smoking, 4 and a man might come along wanting to live, not 
wanting to die, wanting happiness, recoiling from pain; but two 
strong men, having grasped hold of his arms, might drag him towards 
that pit of glowing embers. What do you think about this, house- 
holder ? Would not that man twist his body this way and that ?” 5 

“ Yes, revered sir. What is the reason for this ? Revered sir, 
that man realises: * If I fall down into this pit of glowing embers, 
from that cause I will come to death or pain like unto death/ ” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: * Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened by the Lord to a pit of glowing embers , 6 
of much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril/ And 
having seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdom, 
having avoided , . . the material things of the world are stopped 
entirely. 

i Cf M. i. 145. *~Cf. M. i. 128. * Cf S. ii, 152. 

* Cf . M. i. 74. 6 As at M, i. 607. 

• Cf . 2>. iii. 283; 8. iv. 188; A . iv. 224, v. 175; Sn . 306. 




30 


I. 365-36G 


54. Potaliyasutta 

And, householder, it is as if a man might see in a dream delightful 
parks, delightful woods, delightful stretches of level ground and 
delightful lakes; but on waking up could see nothing. Even so, 
householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus : £ Pleasures of the senses 
have been likened by the Lord to a dream, of much pain, of much 
tribulation, wherein is more peril. * And having seen this thus as it 
really is by means of perfect wisdom . . . the material things of the 
world are stopped entirely. 

And, householder, it is as if a man, having borrowed 1 a loan of 
wealth, [ 366 ] a fashionable 2 vehicle and splendid jewels and ear- 
ornaments, might go forth into the bazaar, honoured for his loan of 
wealth, surrounded by it, so that people having seen him might say: 

4 This man is indeed wealthy, and undoubtedly wealthy men enjoy 
their wealth thus 9 ; but the veritable owners, wherever they might; 
see him, might take away what was theirs. What do you think 
about this, householder ? Would that man have had enough of 
being other (than what he is) V* 

“ Yes, revered sir. What is the reason for this ? It is, revered 
sir, that the veritable owners take away what is theirs.” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus: 4 Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened by the Lord to what is borrowed, of 
much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril.* And having 
seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdom . . . the 
material things of the world are stopped entirely. 

And, householder, it is as if in a dense forest thicket not far from 
a village or a market town there might be a tree laden with ripe 
fruit, but with no fruit fallen to the ground ; and a man might come 
along walking about and aiming at fruit, seeking for fruit, looking 
about for fruit; having plunged into that forest thicket, he might see 
that tree laden with ripe fruit, and it might occur to him: 4 This 
tree is laden with ripe fruit, but no fruit has fallen to the ground. 
However, I know how to climb a tree. Suppose that I, having 
climbed this tree, should eat as much as I like and should fill my 
clothes V 3 So he, having climbed that tree, might eat as much as he 
liked and might fill his clothes. Then a second man might come 


1 Or, begged, ydcitvd. Trenekncr suggests ydceyya , M. i. 574. 

2 poroseyya. P.E.D. rejects the derivation from purisa , as at MA . iii. 44, 
and says the word is derived from punt , a town. However, the text is corrupt 
here; see v.i. at M. i. 501, 574. 

3 ucchanya, used in a similar sense here and at Vin. i. 225. Probably 

meaning the man knotted his cloth garment so as to carry the fruit. 



I. 366-367 


To Potaliya 


31 


along walking about and aiming at fruit, seeking for fruit, looking 
about for fruit, and bringing a sharp axe. Having plunged into 
that forest thicket, he might see that tree laden with ripe fruit, and 
it might occur to him: ‘ This tree is laden with ripe fruit but no fruit 
has fallen to the ground. Now, I don’t know how to climb a tree, 
so suppose that I, having cut down this tree at the root, should eat 
as much as I like and should fill my clothes V So he might cut down 
this tree at the root. What do you think about this, householder ? 
Unless he came down very quickly, would not that tree in falling 
crush the hand or the foot or another part of the body of that man 
who had first climbed the tree, [367] so that, from that cause he 
might come to death or to pain like unto death V* 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, householder, an ariyan disciple reflects thus : ‘ Pleasures 
of the senses have been likened by the Lord to the fruits of a tree, of 
much pain, of much tribulation, wherein is more peril.’ And having 
seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect wisdom, having 
avoided that equanimity which is multiformity, resting on multi- 
formity, he develops that equanimity which is uniformity, resting on 
uniformity wherein all graspings after the material things of the 
world are stopped entirely. 

This ariyan disciple, householder, who has come to this matchless 
purification through equanimity and mindfulness, recollects a variety 
of former habitations, that is to say one birth, two births . . . thus in 
all their mode and detail he recollects a variety of former habitations. 
This ariyan disciple, householder, who has come to this matchless 
purification through equanimity and mindfulness, with the purified 
deva-vision surpassing that of men, sees beings as they are passing 
hence and uprising, mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill- 
going . . . comprehends beings according to the consequences of deeds. 
This ariyan disciple, householder, who has come to this matchless 
purification through equanimity and mindfulness, by the destruction 
of the cankers having here-now realised by his own super-knowledge 

the freedom of mind and the freedom through wisdom that are 
cankerless, enters and abides therein. 

It is to this extent, householder, that in the discipline for an ariyan 
there is an entire giving up in every way of all avocations. What do 
you think about this, householder ? Do you behold in yourself a 
giving up of avocations such as is, in the discipline for an ariyan, an 
entire giving up in every way of all avocations V* 

“ Who am I, revered sir, that there is an entire giving up of all 



I. 367-368 


32 54. Potaliya8Utta 

avocations in every way ? I, revered sir, am far from the entire 
giving up in every way of all avocations according to the discipline 
for an ariyan. For hitherto we, revered sir, deemed wanderers 
belonging to other sects to be superior although they are inferior; 
although they are inferior we offered them food for superiors ; although 
they are inferior we placed them in places for superiors. And we, 
revered sir, deemed monks to be inferior although they are superior; 
although they are superior we offered them food for inferiors; 
although they are superior we placed them in places for inferiors. 
But now we, revered sir, [368] will know that wanderers belonging 
to other sects, being inferior, are inferior; because they are inferior 
we will offer them food for inferiors; because they are inferior we will 
place them in places for inferiors. And we, revered sir, will know 
that monks, being superior, are superior; because they are superior 
we will offer them food for superiors; because they are superior we 
will place them in places for superiors. Indeed, revered sir, the 
Lord has inspired in me a recluse’s regard for recluses, a recluse’s 
satisfaction in recluses, a recluse’s reverence for recluses. It is ex- 
cellent, revered sir, it is excellent, revered sir. Revered sir, it is as 
if one might set upright what had been upset, or might disclose what 
what was covered, or show the way to one who had gone astray, or 
bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with vision might see 
material shapes — even so in many a figure has dhamma been made 
clear by the Lord. I, revered sir, am going to the Lord for refuge 
and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the Lord accept 
me as a lay follower going for refuge from this day forth for as long 
as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Potaliya : 

The Fourth 


55. DISCOURSE TO JIVAKA 

(Jivakasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying at Rajagaha 
in Jivaka Komarabhaeca’s 1 Mango Grove. Then Jivaka Komara- 

1 See Vin, i, 71 jf. t 269 ff. Also ii.i). iv. 381, n. 3. MA. iii. 45 says his 
name means “ Prince-fed.” 



I. 368-369 


To Jwaka 


33 


bhacea approached the Lord ; having approached, having greeted the 
Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance, Jlvaka Komarabhacca spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

“This is what I have heard, revered sir: that they kill living 
creatures on purpose for the recluse Gotama, and that the recluse 
Gotama knowingly makes use of meat killed on purpose and specially 
provided for him. Those who speak thus, revered sir: * They kill 
living creatures on purpose for the recluse Gotama, and the recluse 
Gotama knowingly makes use of meat killed on purpose and specially 
provided for him ’ — now, are these quoting the Lord’s own words, 
revered sir, not misrepresenting the Lord with what is not fact, are 
they explaining in conformity with dhamma , and does no reasoned 
thesis 1 give occasion for contempt'?” 2 

[369] “ Jlvaka, those who speak thus: * They kill living creatures 
on purpose for the recluse Gotama, and the recluse Gotama know- 
ingly makes use of meat killed on purpose and specially provided for 
him ’—these are not quoting my own words, but are misrepresenting 
me with what is not true, with what is not fact. I, Jlvaka, say that 
in three cases meat may not be used : if it is seen, heard, suspected 
(to have been killed on purpose for a monk). In these three cases I, 
Jlvaka, say that meat may not be used. But I, Jlvaka, say that in 
three cases meat may be used: if it is not seen, heard, suspected (to 
have been killed on purpose for a monk). 3 In these three cases I, 
Jlvaka, say that meat may be used. 

As to this, Jlvaka, a monk lives depending on a village or market 
town. 4 He dwells having suffused the first quarter with a mind of 
friendliness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the 
fourth; just so above, below, across; he dwells having suffused the 
whole world everywhere, in every way, with a mind of friendliness 
that is far-reaching, wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, 
without malevolence. A householder or a householder’s son, having 
approached him, invites him to a meal on the morrow. The monk 
accepts, Jlvaka, if he so desires. At the end of that night, having 
dressed in the early morning, taking his bowl and robe, he approaches 


1 vad&nuvada here; some texts read vadnnvpita. 

* Cf. M. i. 482, ii. 127, 222, iii. 77; A. i. 161; D. i. 161, iii. 116; S. ii. 33, 36, 
iii. 6, iv. 61, 340, 381, v. 6. 

* Cf. Vin. i. 238, iii. 172. 

* The next few paragraphs should be compared with A. i. 274 (Sutta 121); 
there are several interesting variations. 



34 


55. Jivakasutta 


I. 369-370 


the dwelling of that householder or householder’s son; having 
approached, he sits down on the appointed seat, and the house- 
holder or householder’s son waits on him with sumptuous 
almsfood. It does not occur to him: * Indeed it is good that a 
householder or a householder’s son waits on me with sumptuous 
almsfood. 0 may a householder or a householder’s son also wait on 
me in the future with similar sumptuous almsfood ’ — this does not 
occur to him. He makes use of that almsfood without being en- 
snared, entranced or enthralled by it, but seeing the peril in it, wise 
as to the escape. What do you think about this, Jlvaka ? Is that 
monk at that time striving for the hurt of self or is he striving for the 
hurt of others or is he striving for the hurt of both ?” 

“ Not this, revered sir.” 

“ Is not that monk at that time, Jivaka, eating food that is 
blameless ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir. I had heard this, revered sir: Sublime is 
abiding in friendliness. 1 The Lord is seen as my witness for this, 
revered sir, for the Lord is abiding in friendliness.” 1 

“ Jivaka, that attachment, that [370] aversion, that confusion 
through which there might be malevolence, these have been got rid 
of by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm-tree stump 
that can come to no further existence in the future. If this is the 
meaning of what you said, Jivaka, I agree with you.” 

“ This is the exact meaning of what I said, revered sir.” 

“As to this, Jivaka, a monk lives depending on a village or 
market town. He dwells having suffused the first quarter with a 
mind of compassion ... a mind of sympathetic joy ... a mind of 
equanimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the 
fourth; just so above, below, across; he dwells having suffused the 
whole world everywhere, in every way, with a mind of equanimity 
that is far-reaching, wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, 
without malevolence. A householder or a householder’s son, having 
approached him, invites him to a meal on the morrow . . .(as above ...) 
Is that monk at that time striving for the hurt of self or is he striving 
for the hurt of others or is he striving for the hurt of both 1” 

“ Not this, revered sir.” 

“ Is not that monk at that time, Jivaka, eating food that is 
blameless ?” 


1 Brahma meltdvihdri . . . bhagavd hi meUavihdri. Cf. Sn. 151, Khp. ix.: 
brahmam etaih viharam idha-m-ahu, sublime is this abiding called here. 



I. 370-371 


To Jlvaka 


35 


“ Yes, revered sir. I had heard this, revered sir: Sublime is 
abiding in equanimity. The Lord is seen as my witness for this, 
revered sir, for the Lord is abiding in equanimity.” 

“ Jlvaka, that attachment, that aversion, that confusion through 
which there might be annoyance, through which there might be 
dislike, through which there might be repugnance, these have been 
got rid of by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm-tree 
stump that can come to no further existence in the future. If this 
is the meaning of what you said, Jfvaka, I agree [371] with you.” 

“ This is the exact meaning of what I said, revered sir.” 

“ Jlvaka, he who kills a living creature on purpose for a Tathagata 
or a Tathagata’s disciple stores up much demerit in five ways: In 
that, when he speaks thus: 4 Go and fetch such and such a living 
creature/ in this first way he stores up much demerit. In that, 
while this living creature is being fetched it experiences pain and 
distress because of the affliction to its throat 1 — in this second way he 
stores up much demerit. In that, when he speaks thus: 4 Go and 
kill that living creature ’ — in this third way he stores up much 
demerit. In that, while this living creature is being killed it experi- 
ences pain and distress, in this fourth way he stores up much demerit. 
In that, if he proffers to 8 a Tathagata or a Tathagata’s disciple what 
is not allowable, 1 * 3 in this fifth way he stores up much demerit. He 
who, Jlvaka, kills a living creature on purpose for a Tathagata or a 
Tathagata’s disciple stores up much demerit in these five ways.” 

When this had been said, Jlvaka Komarabhacca spoke thus to the 
Lord: 44 It is wonderful, revered sir, it is marvellous, revered sir. 
Indeed, revered sir, the monks eat food that is allowable; indeed, 
revered sir, the monks eat food that is blameless. It is excellent, 
revered sir, it is excellent, revered sir. . . .May the Lord accept 

me as a lay-disciple going for refuge from this day forth for as long 
as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Jlvaka: 

The Fifth 


1 galappavedhakcna. MA, iii. 51 says: yottena gale bandhitva kaddhito 

galena pavedhentena (v, 1 . paveihiyamanena va): having secured (or, bound) 
it with a thong (or, strap) round its throat, it is dragged along with agony 
(or, terror) in its throat. 

3 asadeti. MA, iii. 51 gives khculdpetvd , having made to eat. 

3 akappiya, such as various kinds of meat named at MA. iii. 51. Other 
unallowable kinds are given at Yin, i. 218-219. 



56. DISCOURSE WITH UPALI 

(Upalisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Na}anda 
in PavarikaV Mango Grove. Now at that time Nataputta the Jain 
was residing in Nalanda with a large company of Jains. Then 
Dighatapassin 2 the Jain, having walked in Nalanda for almsfood, 
returning from the alms-gathering after the meal, approached 
Pavarika’s Mango Grove and the Lord; [372] having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance. The Lord 
spoke thus to Dighatapassin the Jain as he was standing at a respect- 
ful distance: “ There are seats, Tapassin; if you wish, do sit down.” 
When this had been said, Dighatapassin the Jain, having taken a low 
seat, sat down at a respectful distance. The Lord spoke thus to 
Dighatapassin the Jain as he was sitting down at a respectful 
distance : 

“ How many (kinds of) deeds, Tapassin, does Nataputta the Jain 
lay down for the effecting of an evil deed, for the rolling on of an 
evil deed V 9 

“ Friend Gotama, it is not the custom of Nataputta the Jain to lay 
down 1 deed, deed ’ ; friend Gotama, it is the custom of Nataputta the 
Jain to lay down ‘ wrong, wrong.* ” 3 * * * * * 

“ How many (kinds of) wrongs, Tapassin, does Nataputta the 

1 He was a merchant who apparently sold mantles ( pavara ) in pairs. 
Hence he was also called DussapavSrika, MA. iii. 52; DA. ii. 873; 8 A, iii. 207. 

8 This name means “ The one of long austerity.” 

8 dancia, stem of a tree ; stick and so penalty. P.E.D. says that in the above 

passage it is “ (fig) a means of frightening, frightfulness, violence, teasing”; 
and under mano - it suggests “ mind-punishment.” Chalmers has “ infliction ” ; 
H. Jacobi “ torment ” (8.B.E. xxii. p. 7); Neumann ” Streich,” blow (vol. ii, 

p. 54, n.). In the present context the word appears to mean affliction, injury, 

hurt, wrong done. Sometimes of course it means punishment or penalty. 

Cf. Dhp. 133 papidanda* retaliation, or exchange-blows. See Manu xii, 10: 

“ That man is called a (true) tr%dcm4%n in whose mind these three: control 
over his speech (vagdatufa), control over his thought (manodanda) and control 
over his body {kayadarufa) are firmly fixed.” Here then darufa appears to 
mean “ restraint,” which Monier- Williams gives for this passage. MA. iii. 52 
says that the Jain idea is that kayct- and vaci-dan4a are without cilia (present 
in manodamfa), so that they just stir and sound like trees in the wind. 

36 




37 


I. 372-373 With Vpdli 

Jain lay down for the effecting of an evil deed, for the rolling on of an 
evil deed ?” 

“ Friend Gotama, Nataputta the Jain lays down three (kinds of) 
wrongs for the effecting of an evil deed, for the rolling on of an evil 
deed, that is to say wrong of body, wrong of speech, wrong of mind.” 1 

“ But, Tapassin, is wrong of body one thing, wrong of speech 
another, wrong of mind another V 9 

“ Friend Gotama, wrong of body is one thing, wrong of speech 
another, wrong of mind another.” 

“ But, Tapassin, of these three wrongs thus divided, thus particu- 
larised, which is the wrong that Nataputta the Jain lays down as the 
more blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an 
evil deed ? Is it wrong of body or is it wrong of speech or is it wrong 
of mind?” 

“ Friend Gotama, of these three wrongs thus divided, thus partic- 
ularised, Nataputta the Jain lays down that wrong of body is the 
more blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an 
evil deed ; wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not like it.” 

“ Do you say * wrong of body / Tapassin ?” 

“ I say 4 wrong of body/ friend Gotama.” 

" Do you say < wrong of body,* Tapassin ?” 

“ I say * wrong of body/ friend Gotama.” 

“ Do you say * wrong of body/ Tapassin ?” 

“ I say * wrong of body/ friend Gotama.” 

In this way did the Lord up to the third time pin down Digha- 
tapassin the Jain to this point of controversy. 

[373] When this had been said, Dighatapassin the Jain spoke thus 
to the Lord: “ But, friend Gotama, how many (kinds of) wrongs do 
you lay down for the effecting of an evil deed, for the rolling on of an 
evil deed ?” 

“ Tapassin, it is not the custom of a Tathagata to lay down * wrong, 
wrong * ; Tapassin, it is the custom for a Tathagata to lay down 
4 deed, deed/ ” 

“ But how many (kinds of) deeds do you lay down, friend Gotama, 
for the effecting of an evil deed, for the rolling on of an evil deed V 9 

“ I, Tapassin, lay down three (kinds of) deeds for the effecting of 
an evil deed, for the rolling on of an evil deed, that is to say deed of 
body, deed of speech, deed of mind.” 

1 Cf. SnA . 63, Nd. ii. 293 where daiyda , a synonym for duccarita , wrong 
behaviour in body, speech and thought, afflicts and injures and brings to 
trouble and distress. 




38 56. Updlisutta I. 373-374 

“ But, friend Gotama, is deed of body one thing, deed of speech 
another, deed of mind another ?” 

“ Tapassin, deed of body is one thing, deed of speech another, 
deed of mind another/ 7 

“ But, friend Gotama, of these three deeds thus divided, thus 
particularised, which deed do you lay down as the more blamable in 
the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an evil deed ? Is it 
deed of body or is it deed of speech or is it deed of mind V 9 

“ Tapassin, of these three deeds thus divided, thus particularised, 
I lay down that deed of mind is the more blamable in the effecting of 
an evil deed, in the rolling on of an evil deed; deed of body is not 
like it, deed of speech is not like it/’ 

“ Do you say ‘ deed of mind/ friend Gotama ?” 

“ I say ‘ deed of mind/ Tapassin/’ 

“ Do you say ‘ deed of mind/ friend Gotama V 9 

“ I say ‘ deed of mind/ Tapassin/’ 

“ Do you say ‘ deed of mind,’ friend Gotama ?” 

“ I say ‘ deed of mind/ Tapassin.” 

In this way did Dighatapassin the Jain, having up to the third 
time pinned down the Lord to the point of controversy, rising from 
his seat, approach Nataputta the Jain. 

Now at that time Nataputta the Jain was sitting down together 
with a very large company of householders headed by Upali of 
Balaka village. 1 Nataputta the Jain saw Dighatapassin the Jain 
coming in the distance; having seen him, he spoke thus to Digha- 
tapassin the Jain “ Well, where are you coming from, Tapassin, in 
the heat of the day ?” 

“ I, revered sir, am coming from the presence of the recluse 
Gotama.” 

“ Now, did you, Tapassin, have any conversation together with the 
recluse Gotama ?” 

[374] “ Indeed, revered sir, I did have some conversation together 
with the recluse Gotama.” 

“ On what topic, Tapassin, was there some conversation between 
you and the recluse Gotama ?” 

Then Dighatapassin the Jain told Nataputta the Jain the whole 
of the conversation he had had with the Lord. When this had been 
said, Nataputta the Jain spoke thus to Dighatapassin the Jain: 

“ It is good, it is good, Tapassin, that the recluse Gotama was 


1 Balakiniya, see D.P.P.N, 


I. 374-375 


39 


With Updli 

answered thus by Dlghatapassin the Jain, an instructed disciple who 
understands aright the teacher’s instruction. For how can an 
insignificant wrong of mind shine out in comparison with this 
important 1 wrong of body, since wrong of body itself is the more 
blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an evil 
deed — wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not like it.” 

When this had been said, Upali the householder spoke thus to 
Nataputta the Jain: 

“ Good, revered sir, is Tapassin, he is good, in that the recluse 
Gotama was answered thus by the revered Tapassin, an instructed 
disciple who understands aright the teacher’s instruction. For how 
can an insignificant wrong of mind shine out in comparison with this 
important wrong of body since wrong of body itself is the more 
blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an evil 
deed — wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not like it. 
But, if you please, I am going, revered sir, I will refute the words of 
the recluse Gotama on this point of controversy. If the recluse 
Gotama pins me down as he pinned down the revered Tapassin, then 
as a strong man 2 who has taken hold of the fleece of a long-fleeced 
ram, might tug it towards him, might tug it backwards, might tug it 
forwards and backwards, even so will I, speech by speech, tug the 
recluse Gotama forwards, tug him backwards, tug him forwards and 
backwards. And even as a powerful distiller of spirituous liquor, 
having sunk his cask for the spirituous liquor in a deep pool of water, 
taking it by a corner might tug it forwards, might tug it backwards, 
might tug it forwards and backwards, even so will I, speech by speech, 
tug the recluse Gotama forwards, tug him backwards, tug him for- 
wards and backwards. And even as a powerful drunkard of 
abandoned life, having taken hold of a hair-sieve at the corner, 
would shake it upwards, would shake it downwards, would toss it 
about, even so will I, speech By speech, [375] shake the recluse 
Gotama upwards, shake him downwards, toss him about. And even 
as a full-grown elephant, sixty years old, having plunged into a deep 
tank, plays at the game called the ‘ merry- washing,’ evenso methinks 
will I play the game of ‘ merry-washing ’ with the recluse Gotama. 
But, if you please, I am going, revered sir, I will refute the words of 
the recluse Gotama on this point of controversy.” 

“ Go you, householder, refute the words of the recluse Gotama on 

1 oldrika , here the opposite of chava, “ insignificant ” ; explained by 
mahanta, “ great,” at M A. iii. 55. 

* As at M, i. 228 for the following similes. 



40 56. Updlisutia I. 375-376 

this point of controversy. For, householder, either I or Dlgha- 
tapassin the Jain or you could refute the words of the recluse 
Gotama.” 

When this had been said, Dighatapassin the Jain spoke thus to 
Nataputta the Jain: “ I am not pleased, revered sir, that the house- 
holder Upali should refute the words of the recluse Gotama. For 
the recluse Gotama is deceitful, revered sir, he knows the ‘ enticing 
device ’ by which he entices disciples of other sects.” 1 

u It is impossible, Tapassin, it cannot come to pass that the house- 
holder Upali should come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. 
But this situation exists — that the recluse Gotama might come to 
discipleship under the householder Upali. Go you, householder, 
refute the words of the recluse Gotama on this point of controversy. 
Either I, householder, could refute the recluse Gotama, or Dighata- 
passin the Jain, or you.” And a second time . . . And a third time 
did Dighatapassin the Jain speak thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ I 
am not pleased. Either I, householder, could refute the 
recluse Gotama, or Dighatapassin the Jain, or you.” 

“ Very well, revered sir,” and the householder Upali, having 
answered Nataputta the Jain in assent, rising from his seat, having 
greeted Nataputta the Jain keeping his right side towards him, 
approached Pavarika’s Mango Grove [376] and the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the house- 
holder Upali spoke thus to the Lord: “ Revered sir, did not Digha- 
tapassin the Jain come here ?” 

“ Yes, householder, Dighatapassin the Jain did come here.” 

“ And did you, revered sir, have any conversation with Digha- 
tapassin the Jain ?” 

“ Indeed, householder, I did have some conversation with Digha- 
tapassin the Jain.” 

“ But on what topic did you, revered sir, have this conversation 
with Dighatapassin the Jain ?” 

Then the Lord told the householder Upali the whole of the con- 
versation he had had with Dighatapassin the Jain. When this had 
been said, the householder Upali spoke thus to the Lord: “ Good, 
revered sir, is Tapassin, he is good, in that the Lord was answered 
thus by Dighatapassin the Jain, an instructed disciple who under- 
stands aright the teacher’s instruction. For how can an insig- 


1 As at A, ii. 100. 



I. 376-377 With Vpdli 41 

nificant wrong of mind shine out in comparison with this important 
wrong of body, since wrong of body is itself the more blamable in the 
effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of an evil deed— wrong of 
speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not like it.” 

“ If you, householder, were to speak as one grounded on the truth, 
there might be some conversation here.” 

“ I, revered sir, will speak as one grounded on the truth. Let us 
have some conversation here” 

“ What do you think about this, householder ? There might be 
a Jain here who, although sick, suffering, very ill, refuses cold water 1 
and takes (only) warm water ; not getting cold water, he might pass 
away. Now, householder, where is it that Nataputta the Jain lays 
down that there is uprising for him ?” 

“ Revered sir, there are devas called ‘ Mind attached.’ 2 He 
uprises there. What is the reason for this ? It is, revered sir, that 
when he passed away he was devoted to mind.” 

“ Householder, householder ! Take care how you explain, house- 
holder. Your earlier (remarks) do not tally with your later, nor 
your later with your earlier. And yet these words were spoken by 
you, householder: * I, revered sir, will speak as one grounded on the 
truth. Let us have some conversation here.’ ” 

“ Although, revered sir, the Lord speaks thus, yet wrong of body 
is the more blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on 
of an evil deed — wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not 
like it.” 

“ What do you think about this, [377] householder ? There might 
be a Jain here who is controlled by the control of the fourfold watch : 3 
he is wholly restrained in regard to water; 4 he is bent on warding off 


1 MA . iii. 67, “ Jains are aware that there are conscious beings ” in cold 
water. 

a Manosattd ; beings who depend on, hang on (lagga, laggita) mind, MA . 
iii. 57 ; satta is here p.p. of sajjati. 

8 See D* i. 57 j Dial . i. 75, n. 1. Referred to at S . i. 66. The Buddhist 
fourfold watch is given at D. iii. 48 /., MA. iii. 68; see K.8. 1. 91. 

4 sabba-vari-varito. MA . iii. 58 gives two meanings: either vdrita-sabba- 
udaka , he is restrained in regard to all water; or sabbena papavdranena varita - 
pdpo, evil is restrained by the total warding off of evil. DA. i. 168, SA, i. 
126-127 omit the second alternative, but speak .of evil in connection with 
the three remaining “ watches,” controls or restraints, which read: sabbavari- 
yuto sabbavdridhuto sabbavartphufo. It would seem that MA. iii. 58 means 
“ the total warding off of evil ” of its second alternative to the first clause to 
include the use of (unfiltered) water, in which there would still be small living 




42 56, Updlisutta I. 377 

all evil; he has shaken off all evil; he is permeated with the (warding 
off) of all evil— but while going out or returning he brings many 
small creatures to destruction. What result, householder, does 
Nataputta the Jain lay down for him ?” 

“ Nataputta the Jain, revered sir, lays down that, being un- 
intentional, there is no great blame.” 

44 But if he does intend it, householder ?” 

“ It is of great blame, revered sir.” 

u In what (division 1 ), householder, does Nataputta the Jain lay 
down 4 intention * 1” 

44 In that of wrong of mind, revered sir.” 

44 Householder, householder ! Take care how you explain, house- 
holder. Your earlier (remarks) do not tally with your later nor your 
later with your earlier. And yet these words were spoken by you, 
householder: 4 1, revered sir, will speak as one grounded on the 
truth. Let us have some conversation here.* ” 

44 Although, revered sir, the Lord speaks thus, yet wrong of body 
is the more blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on 
of an evil deed— wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not 
like it.” 

44 What do you think about this, householder ? Is this Najanda 
rich and wealthy, crowded and populous ?” 

44 Yes, revered sir, this Nalanda is rich and wealthy, crowded and 
populous.” 

44 What do you think about this, householder ? A man might 
come here with a drawn sword 2 and speak thus: 4 In a moment, in a 
second, I will make all the living creatures in this Najanda into one 
heap of flesh, one mass of flesh/ What do you think about this, 
householder ? Is that man able in one moment, one second, to make 
all the living creatures in this Najanda into one heap of flesh, one 
mass of flesh ?” 3 

44 Even ten men, revered sir, even twenty, thirty, forty men, even 
fifty men are not able in one moment, one second, to make all the 


1 kotihasa, MA . iii. 58. * ukkhittdsika , as at 8 . iv. 173. 

* As at AT. i. 404; ZJ. i. 52. 


things. A. L. Basham, History of the Ajivikas , p. 16, translating: “ He 
practices restraint with regard to water, he avoids all sin, by avoiding sin his 
sins are washed away, he is filled with the sense of all sin avoided/* remarks 
that this is a “ doubtful interpretation on the basis of Buddhaghosa.” See 
also Ayaratlga Suita, I. 13 (translation at 8.B.E. XXII). 



I. 377-378 


43 


With Ufdli 

living creatures in this Nalanda into one heap of flesh, one mass of 
flesh. How then can one insignificant man shine out at this V 9 
“ What do you think about this, householder ? A recluse or a 
brahman might come here, one of psychic power and attained to 
mastery of thought, and he might speak thus: 4 1 will reduce this 
Na]anda to cinders by one (act of) ill-will of mind. 1 What do you 
think about this, householder ? Is that recluse or brahman who is 
of psychic power and attained to mastery of thought, able to reduce 
this Najanda to cinders by one (act of) ill-will of mind V* 

[378] “ That recluse or brahman, revered sir, by one (act of) ill-will 
of mind is able to reduce even ten Nalandas to cinders, or even 
twenty, thirty, forty or fifty Nalandas. How then can one in- 
significant Nalanda shine out at this ?” 

“ Householder, householder ! Take care how you explain, house- 
holder. Your earlier (remarks) do not tally with your later, nor your 
later with your earlier. And yet these words were spoken by you, 
householder: ‘ I, revered sir, will speak as one grounded on the truth. 
Let us have some conversation here.* ” 

“ Although, revered sir, the Lord speaks thus, yet wrong of body is 
the more blamable in the effecting of an evil deed, in the rolling on of 
an evil deed — wrong of speech is not like it, wrong of mind is not like 
it,” 

“ What do you think about this, householder ? Have you heard 
that the (former) forests of Dandaka, 1 Kalinga, 2 Mejjha 3 and 
Matanga 4 became forests again ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir, I have heard that the (former) forests of 
Dandaka, Kalinga, Mejjha and Matanga became forests again.” 

“ What do you think about this, householder ? Perhaps you have 
heard how it was that the (former) forests of Dandaka, Kalinga, 
Mejjha and Matanga became forests again ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir, I have heard that through (an act of) ill-will of 
mind on the part of seers the forests of Dandaka, Kalinga, Mejjha 
and Matanga became forests again.” 

“ Householder, householder ! Take care how you explain, house- 
holder. Your earlier (remarks) do not tally with your later, nor your 
later with .your earlier. And yet these words were spoken by you, 
householder: 4 1, revered sir, will speak as one grounded on the truth. 
Let us have some conversation here.’ ” 

1 Jd. iii. 463, v. 133 ff. t 267; Miln . 130. 

* Jd . v. 144; Miln . 130. 3 Jd. iv. 389, v. 267; Miln. 130. 

4 Jd. v. 114, 267; Miln. 130. Also known as Mejjhfiranna; cf. Jd. iv. 388 /. 



44 56. Updlisntta I. 378-379 

“ I, revered sir, was pleased and satisfied 1 with the Lord’s first 
illustration. But because I wanted to hear the Lord’s diversified 
ways of putting questions, 2 I judged that I must make myself his 
adversary. It is excellent, revered sir; revered sir, it is excellent. 
As, revered sir, one might set upright what had been upset, or disclose 
what had been covered, or show the way to one who had gone astray, 
or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with vision might 
see material shapes — even so in many a figure has dhamma been made 
clear by the Lord. I, revered sir, am going to the Lord for refuge 
[379J and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the Lord 
accept me as a lay-disciple going for refuge from today forth for as 
long as life lasts.” 

“ Now, householder, make a proper investigation. Proper in- 
vestigation is right in the case of well-known men like yourself.” 3 

" I, revered sir, am even exceedingly pleased and satisfied with that 
which the Lord has said to me: ‘ Now, householder, make a proper 
investigation . . . like yourself.* For if, revered sir, members of other 
sects had secured me as a disciple, they would have paraded a banner 
all round Nalanda, saying: ‘ The householder Upali has joined our 
disciplehood.’ But then the Lord spoke to me thus: * Now, house- 
holder, make a proper investigation. Proper investigation is right 
in the case of a well-known man like yourself.’ So I, revered sir, for 
the second time am going to the Lord for refuge and to dhamma and 
to the Order of monks. May the Lord accept me as a lay-disciple 
going for refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts.” 

“ For a long time, householder, 4 your family has been a well-spring 
to the Jains. You will bethink you to give alms to those that 
approach you V* 

“ I, revered sir, am even exceedingly pleased and satisfied that the 
Lord speaks to me thus: * For a long time ... to those that approach 
you V I have heard, revered sir, that the recluse Gotama speaks 
thus: ‘ Gifts should be given to me only, not to others should gifts 
be given. Gifts should be given to my disciples only, not to the 
disciples of others should gifts be given. What is given to me is 
alone of great fruit, what is given to others is not of great fruit. 
What is given to my disciples is alone of great fruit, what is given to 
the disciples of others is not of great fruit.’ But then the Lord urged 

1 Following passage also at D, ii. 352. 

* panhapapibhana , as at M. i. 83. * As at Vin . i. 236; A . iv. 185. 

4 Following passage at Vin . i. 236 /. (Siha the general). And see Dial . 

i. 177, n. 3 for further references. 



I. 379-380 With Upali 45 

upon me giving to the Jains also. Indeed, revered sir, we shall know 
the right time for that. So I, revered sir, for the third time am 
going to the Lord for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. 
May the Lord accept me as a lay disciple going for refuge from today 
forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Then the Lord talked a progressive talk 1 to the householder Upali, 
that is to say talk on giving, talk on moral habit, talk on heaven ; he 
explained the peril, the vanity, the depravity of pleasures of the 
senses, the advantage in renouncing them. When the Lord knew 
that the mind of the householder Upali [380] was ready, malleable, 
devoid of the hindrances, uplifted, pleased, then he explained to him 
that teaching on dhamma which the Awakened Ones have themselves 
discovered : ill, uprising, stopping, the Way. And as a clean cloth 
without black specks will easily take dye, even so, as the householder 
Upali was (sitting) there on that very seat, dhamma-v ision, dustless, 
stainless, arose to him that: whatever is of the nature to uprise, all 
that is of the nature to stop. Then the householder Upali, as one 
who had seen dhamma , attained to dhamma , known dhamma , plunged 
into dhamma , who had crossed over doubt, put away uncertainty, 
who had attained without another’s help to full confidence in the 
Teacher’s instruction, spoke thus to the Lord: “ Now, I, revered sir, 
must be going, I am very busy, there is much to be done.” 

44 You, householder, must now do that for which you think it is the 
right time.” 

Then the householder Upali, having rejoiced in what the Lord had 
said, having given thanks, rising from his seat, having greeted the 
Lord keeping his right side towards him, approached his own 
dwelling ; having approached, he said to the door-keeper : 

“ Today, good door-keeper, I am closing the door to men and 
women Jains; but the door is open to the Lord’s monks, nuns, men 
and women lay-disciples. If any Jain comes you should speak thus 
to him : 4 Stand still, sir, do not enter. Today the householder Upali 
has come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama ; the door is closed 

to Jain men and women, but the door is open to the Lord’s monks, 
nuns, men and women lay-disciples. If you, sir, need almsfood, 
stand still just where you are and they will bring it to you here.’ ” 

44 Very well, sir,” the door-keeper answered the householder Upali 
in assent. 

Then Dighatapassin the Jain heard that the householder Upali 


1 As at Fin. i. 15-16, etc. See B.D. iv. 23, n. 1 for further references. 



4(5 56. Updlisutta I. 380-381 

had come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. Then Digha- 
tapassin the Jain approached Nataputta the Jain; having approa- 
ched, he spoke thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ I have heard, 
revered sir, that the householder Upali has come to discipleship under 
the recluse Gotama.” 

“ This is impossible, Tapassin, it cannot come to pass that the 
householder Upali should come to discipleship under the recluse 
Gotama; but this situation exists: that the recluse Gotama might 
come to discipleship under the householder Upali. H 

[381] And a second time . . . And a third time did Dighatapassin 
the Jain speak thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ I have heard, revered 
sir, that the householder Upali lias come to discipleship under the 
recluse Gotama.” 

“ This is impossible, Tapassin, it cannot come to pass that the 
householder Upali should come to discipleship under the recluse 
Gotama; but this situation exists: that the recluse Gotama might 
come to discipleship under the householder Upali.” 

“ If you please, revered sir, I am going to find out whether or not 
the householder Upali has come to discipleship under the recluse 
Gotama.” 

“ Do go, Tapassin, and find out whether or not the householder 
Upali has come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.” 

Then Dighatapassin the Jain approached the dwelling of the house- 
holder Upali. The door-keeper saw Dighatapassin the Jain coming 
in the distance; seeing him, he spoke thus to Dighatapassin the Jain: 
“ Stand still, revered sir, do not enter. Today the householder Upali 
has come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama ; the door is closed 
to Jain men and women, but the door is open to the Lord’s monks, 
nuns, men and women lay-disciples. If you, revered sir, need alms- 
food, stand still just where you are and they will bring it to you here.” 

Having said: “ Friend, I am not in need of almsfood,” having 
turned back again, he approached Nataputta the Jain; having 
approached, he spoke thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ It is quite true, 
revered sir, that Upali the householder has come to discipleship under 
the recluse Gotama. As to that, I did not agree with you, revered sir, 
and I said : ‘ I am not pleased, revered sir, that the householder Upali 
should refute the words of the recluse Gotama. For the recluse 
Gotama is deceitful, revered sir, he knows the * enticing device ’ by 
which he entices disciples of other sects.’ Now, revered sir, your 
householder Upali has been enticed by the recluse Gotama by the 
1 enticing device.’ ” 



I. 381-382 With Vpdli 47 

“ This is impossible, Tapassin, it cannot come to pass that the 
householder Upali should have come to discipleship under the recluse 
Gotama; but this situation exists: that the recluse Gotama might 
come to discipleship under the householder Upali/' And a second 
time . . . And a third time Dighatapassin the Jain spoke thus to 
Nataputta the Jain: “ It is quite true, revered sir, that the house- 
holder Upali has come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. 
[382] As to that, I did not agree with you, revered sir, and I said : 

1 1 am not pleased, revered sir, that the householder Upali should 
refute the words of the recluse Gotama Now, revered sir, 

your householder Upali has been enticed by the recluse Gotama by 
the * enticing device.' ” 

“ This is impossible, Tapassin, it cannot come to pass that the 
householder Upali should come to discipleship under the recluse 
Gotama; but this situation exists: that the recluse Gotama might 
come to discipleship under the householder Upali. But if you 
please, Tapassin, I am going to find out for myself whether or not the 
householder Upali has come to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. ’ ' 

Then Nataputta the Jain together with a great company of Jains 
approached the dwelling of the householder Upali. The door-keeper 
saw Nataputta the Jain coming in the distance ; seeing him, he spoke 
thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ Stand still, revered sir, do not enter. 
Today the householder Upali has come to discipleship under the 
recluse Gotama; the door is closed to Jain men and women, but the 
door is open to the Lord’s monks, nuns, men and women lay-disciples. 
•If you, revered sir, need almsfood, stand still just where you are and 
they will bring it to you here.” 

“ Well then, good door-keeper, approach the householder Upali; 
having approached, speak thus to the householder Upali: ‘ Revered 
sir, Nataputta the Jain is standing outside the porch of the door 
together with a large company of Jains, and he wishes to see you.' ” 

“ Very good, revered sir,” and the door-keeper, having answered 
Nataputta the Jain in assent, approached the householder Upali; 
having approached, he spoke thus to the householder Upali : “ Revered 
sir, Nataputta. the Jain . „ . wishes to see you.” 

“ Well then, good door-keeper, make ready seats in the middle 
hall with a door.” 1 


1 MA . iii. 93 says that if a house has seven porches the middle one is the 
fourth; if five porches the middle one is the third; if three porches, then the 
second porch with a door is caUed the middle hall with a door. Cf. below, 
p, 266. 




48 


I. 382-383 


56. Updlisutta 

44 Yes, revered sir,” and the door-keeper, having answered the 
householder Upali in assent, having made ready seats in the middle 
hall with a door, approached the householder Upali; having ap- 
proached, he spoke thus to the householder Upali: 44 Those seats, 
revered sir, have been made ready in the middle hall with a door. 
Do now that for which you think it is the right time.” 

Then the householder Upali [383] approached the middle hall with 
a door; having approached and having sat down there on the chief 
and best, the choicest and finest seat, he summoned the door-keeper, 
and said: 44 Well now, good door-keeper, approach Nataputta the 
Jain; having approached, speak thus to Nataputta the Jain: 4 The 

householder Upali, revered sir, says: Do come in if you wish, revered 

> >» 
sir. 

“ Very good, revered sir,” and the door-keeper having answered 
the householder Upali in assent, approached Nataputta the Jain; 
having approached, he spoke thus to Nataputta the Jain: “The 
householder Upali, revered sir, says : 4 Do come in if you wish, 
revered sir.* ” Then Nataputta the Jain together with the large 
company of Jains approached the middle hall with a door. 

Then the householder Upali, who was there first, saw Nataputta 
the Jain coming in the distance; having seen him and gone out to 
meet him, having with his upper cloth dusted the chief and best, the 
choicest and finest seat, having taken possession of it, he sat down 
on it himself; and now when he himself had sat down on the chief 
and best, the choicest and finest seat, he spoke thus to Nataputta the 
Jain: “ There are seats, revered sir; do sit down if you wish.” 

When this had been said, Nataputta the Jain spoke thus to the 
householder Upali: 44 You, householder, are out of your mind; you, 
householder, are idiotic. Saying: 4 1, revered sir, will refute the 
recluse Gotama *, and having gone (to h~ a), you have returned 
enmeshed in a great verbal tangle. 1 Householder, as a man, a 
gelder, having gone away, might return with removed testicles, or 
as a man, a gouger, having gone away, might return with removed 
eyeballs, even so did you, householder, saying: 4 1, revered sir, will 
refute the recluse Gotama/ having gone (to him), return enmeshed 
in a great verbal tangle. You, householder, were enticed by the 
4 enticing device ’ of the recluse Gotama.” 

44 Auspicious, revered sir, is this 4 enticing device/ lovely, revered 
sir, is this ‘enticing device/ If, revered sir, my dear kith and kin 


1 vadasanghalapatimukka . Cf. tanhdsanghatapat imukka at M. i. 271. 



I. 383-385 With Updli 49 

could be enticed by this ‘ enticing/ for long it would be for the 
welfare and happiness of my dear kith and kin. And, revered sir, 
if all nobles could be enticed by this ‘ enticing, 5 for long it would be 
for the [384] welfare and happiness of all nobles also. And, revered 
sir, if all brahmans ... all merchants ... all workers could be enticed 
by this 4 enticing/ for long it would be for the welfare and happiness 
of all workers also. And, revered sir, if the world, with its devas , its 
Maras, its Brahmas, creation with its recluses and brahmans, its devas 
and men, could be enticed by this 4 enticing/ for long it would be for 
the welfare and happiness of this world with its devas , its Maras, its 
Brahmas, of creation with its recluses and brahmans, its devas and 
men. Well then, revered sir, I will make you a parable, for by a 
parable some intelligent persons here understand the meaning of 
what has been said. 1 

Once upon a time, revered sir, a certain brahman, worn, old, full 
of years, had a young brahman wife, pregnant and nearing her 
confinement. Then, sir, that young brahman woman spoke thus to 
that brahman: ‘Go you, brahman, having bought a young male 
monkey at a shop, bring him along so that he can be a playmate for 
my little boy. 5 When this had been said, revered sir, that brahman 
spoke thus to that young brahman woman : ‘ Wait, my dear, until 
you have given birth. If you, my dear, give birth to a little boy, 
then having bought a young male monkey at that shop, I will bring 
him along so that he can be a playmate for your little boy. But if 
you, my dear, give birth to a little girl, having bought a young female 
monkey at that shop, I will bring her along so that she can be a play- 
mate for your little girl/ And a second time . . . And a third time 
that young brahman woman spoke thus to that brahman: ‘ Go you, 
brahman, having bought a young male monkey at that shop, bring 
him along so that he can be a playmate for my little boy. 5 Then, 
revered sir, that brahman, being passionately in love with that 
young brahman woman, having bought a young male monkey at that 
shop, and having brought him back, spoke thus to that young brahman 
woman: 1 My dear, this is the young male monkey, bought for you 
at that shop, [385] and who has come to be a playmate for your little 
boy. 5 When this had been said, revered sir, that young brahman 
woman said to that brahman: ‘ Do you go, brahman, and taking that 
young male monkey, approach Rattapani, the dyer's son; having 
approached, speak thus to Rattapani, the dyer’s son: Good 


1 As at M. i. 148. 



50 56. Updlisutta I. 385-386 

Rattapapi, I want this young male monkey dyed a daubed yellow 
colour, thoroughly pressed all round, 1 and made smooth on each 
side/ Then, revered sir, that brahman, being passionately in love 
with that young brahman woman, taking that young male monkey, 
approached Rattapapi, the dyer’s son; having approached, he spoke 
thus to Rattapapi, the dyer’s son: * Good Rattapapi, I want this 
young male monkey dyed a daubed yellow colour, thoroughly 
pressed all round, and made smooth on each side.’ 

When this had been said, Rattapapi, the dyer’s son, spoke thus to 
that brahman : * Yes, sir, this young male monkey can take colouring, 
but he can’t take pressing or smoothing.’ Even so, revered sir, is 
this doctrine 2 of the foolish Jains, for it takes colouring from fools 
but not from the wise 3 , it does not take (kindly) to examination, it 
does not take (kindly) to smoothing. Then, revered sir, after a 
time that brahman, taking a new pair of garments, approached 
Rattapapi, the dyer’s son; having approached, he spoke thus to 
Rattapapi, the dyer’s son: ‘ Good Rattapapi, I want this new pair 
of garments dyed a daubed yellow colour, thoroughly pressed all 
round, and made smooth on each side.’ When this had been said, 
Rattapapi, the dyer’s son, spoke thus to that brahman: ‘ Yes, sir, 
this new pair of garments of yours can take the colouring and it can 
take the pressing and it can take the smoothing.’ Even so, revered 
sir, is the doctrine of this Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened 
One, for it takes its colouring from the wise, not from fools, and it 
takes (kindly) to examination and it takes (kindly) to smoothing.” 

“ Householder, this company including the rulers know thus: 
Upali the householder is a disciple of Nataputta the Jain. House- 
holder, whose disciple do we understand you to be ?” When this 
had been said, the householder Upali, rising from his seat, having 
arranged his upper cloth over one shoulder, [886] having saluted the 
Lord with joined palms, spoke thus to Nataputta the Jain: “ Well 
then, revered sir, hear whose disciple I am: 

Of the wise, 4 whose confusion is gone, whose mental barrenness 
is split asunder, 5 who has won to victory, 


1 Said of a robe, below, and at 3. ii. 282. 

a vada . 

3 MA. iii. 95 says that neither the doctrine of the Jains nor another useless 
way of speaking is liked in the (Maha-) Bharata and the Ramayana, and so on. 

4 dhlra. MA . iii. 96 equates this with pandicca, partdiia . 

8 Cf. M. Sta. 16. 




I* 386 With Updli 51 

Who is without ill, 1 of very even mind, of grown moral habit, 
of lovely wisdom, 

The 1 All-within,’ 2 the stainless — of this Lord the disciple am I. 

Of him who has no doubts, rejoicing, the material things of the 
world renounced, 3 of joyful sympathy, 

Who is a recluse, a human being, in his last body, a man, 

The peerless, the dustless — of this Lord the disciple am I. 

Of him who is sure, skilled, the leader away, 4 the excellent 
charioteer, 

The matchless, the shining, of no incertitude, 5 bringing light, 

Breaking pride, the hero 6 — of this Lord the disciple am I. 

Of the noblest of men, immeasurable, deep, 7 won to knowledge, 8 

Bringer of security, a knower 9 , on dhamma standing, self- 
controlled, 

Who has gone beyond attachment, who is freed — of this Lord 
the disciple am I. 

Of the supreme one, 10 whose lodgings are remote, who has 
destroyed the fetters, who is freed, 

Who speaks amiably, who is purified, the flag laid low% 11 pas- 
sionless, 

Tamed, without impediments 12 — of this Lord the disciple am I, 


I anight. MA. iii. 96 says niddukkha; cf. Jd. iii. 443; PvA. 230; DhA. 
iii. 454; UdA. 370. A different explanation is given at BnA . i. 25. 

* vessantara , occurring also at It. p. 32 (vismntara). MA. iii. 96 explains 
as “ poised, having crossed the unevenness (v.L vim , poison) of passion, etc.” 
See Min. Anth. II. 139, n. 1, 

3 vantalokdmim, as at Dhp. 378. The lokdmisa are identified at MA. iii. 
97 with kdmagwia, as in the Nivdpamtta (M. Sta. 25). 

4 venayika , the averter, or diverter of passions, etc., or as at MA. iii. 97 
the one who disciplines beings. Used in a derogatory sense of “ the recluse 

Gotama ” at if. i. 140. 

* nikkankha, as at S. ii. 84. 4 vira. MA. iii. 97 reads viriya, energy. 

7 Cf. M. i. 487 where the Tathagata is deep (or unfathomable) and immeasur- 
able as the great ocean, 

3 monapattassd ti naiyam patlassa, MA. iii. 97. 

9 veda . This may mean that he is Knowledge itself. MA. iii. 97 says vcdo 
vuccati ndnam. 

10 naga, supreme in his solitude, far from evil; cf. S. i. 28. 

II pannadhaja; cf. M. i. 139, A. iii. 84. One whose fight is over. 

J1 nippapanca; cf. Dh. 254 ; M . i. 65. 



52 56. UpdlisuUa I. 386 

Of the seventh seer, 1 trust gone, 2 of threefold wisdom, Brahma- 
attained, 3 

Washen, skilled in the lines, 4 tranquil, who discovered knowledge. 

Breaker of the citadel, Sakka 6 — of this Lord the disciple 
am I. 

Of the pure one, whose self is developed, who has attained the 
attainable, 6 the expounder, 

The one with recollection, whose vision is clear, 7 not bent on 
passion, 8 without hatred, 

Impassible, attained to mastery — of this Lord the disciple 
am I. 

1 MA . iii. 97 says that of the six seers (Buddhas) who have arisen since 
Vipassin, he is the seventh. Cf. Sn. 356; S. i. 192; Thag. 1240. Fur. Dial. 
i. 277, n. refers us to Digha Sutta 14 for a pioneer list of seven Buddhas 
“amplified later (Jd. i. 44) by inventing eighteen extra predecessors for 
Gotama, so that he became the twenty-fifth.” Cf. SnA . i. 361 and Budv. 

* Sn. 957, Cf. “ Go not by hearsay ” in the discourse to the Kalamas. 

9 Brahmapattassa. Cf. D. iii. 84, It. p, 67, etc., brahmabhuta. 

4 Cf. D. i. 88; A. i. 163; M. ii. 133 where the word padaka occurs among 
the items of a brahman’s knowledge. MA. iii. 98 says, “ having supplied the 
syllables, he is skilled in making verses and lines ( pada ).” On pada , a line, 
see B.D. ii. 190 /. where it refers to a line of dhamma; and as such I take it 
here. But I also suggest that padaka has a reference to the Tathagata’s 
footprints as in M . Sutta 27. 

* purindada Sakka. MA. iii. 98 takes these as separate terms, the former 
meaning the bestower of the gift of dhamma; and the latter “ able, strong, 
capable ” (mmattka) which of course is one meaning of sakka. But purindada 
is also an epithet of Sakka, and Sakka —Indra, Cf. S. i. 230 where purindada 
is explained as “ giver from town to town.” A. K. Coomaraswamy, Hinduism 
and Buddhism , p. 76 says “insofar as the Buddha’s ‘life* and deeds are 
described, it is the doings of Brahma as Agni and Indra that are being retold,” 
and see loc. cit. n. 256, where A. K. C, says that " in M. i. 386 the Buddha 
seems to be addressed as Indra.” At Budv. xvi. 9 the Buddha says that in 
the time of the Buddha Dhammadassin he was Sakka purindada. See also 
C. E. Godage, The Place of Indra in Early Buddhism , p. 49: Purindada is a 
distortion of Yedic Puramdara (fort-shatterer), when the clouds were fortresses. 
To shatter the clouds means to obtain the life-giving rains (cf. JRV. I. 102. 7). 
Siva (Budra) is Tripur&ntaka, he who puts an end to the three towns (built 
in the earth, the middle Bpace and the firmament by a tyrant-demon, asura ). 
See Indo-Aryan Mythology , vol. I, pp. 34, 248, 353, 376, 379, 384. 

* pattipatta , as at Sn. 536; It. p. 32. MA. iii. 98, “ who has attained those 
excellent things that must be attained, pattabba .” 

7 Cf. Sn. 349; A. iv. 244, vipassin. 

9 Both P.EJD. and C.P.D. translate anabhinata as above. MA. iii. 98 
explains by arahatta. 



I. 386-387 With tJpali 53 

Of him who has gone to the highest, the meditator, inwardly 
unobstructed, 1 cleansed, 

The unattached, the unaiming, 2 the aloof, the attainer of the 
highest, 

The crossed over, the helper across — of this Lord the disciple 
am I. 

Of the calmed, the one of extensive wisdom, of great wisdom, 
without greed, 3 

The Tathagata, the Well-farer, incomparable person, unequalled, 

The confident, the accomplished — of this Lord the disciple 
am I. 

Of the cutter off of craving, the Awakened One, obscurity gone, 4 5 
unstained, 

Worthy of offerings, the yakkha , 6 the best of persons, beyond 
measure, 6 

Great, attained to the height of glory — of this Lord the disciple 
am X ” 

“ But when were these splendours of the recluse Gotama collected 7 
by you, householder ?” 

“ Revered sir, it as if there were a great heap of flowers, of different 
flowers, 8 [387] which a clever garland-maker or his apprentice might 
string into a variegated garland; even so, revered sir, this Lord has 
many splendours, many hundreds of splendours. And who, revered 
sir, would not give praise 9 to one deserving praise V 9 


1 ananngaiantara . MA. iii. 98 refers this to the unobstruetion of the mind 
by the kilesas. 

* appahina. No comment at MA. iii. 98. C.P.D. refers the word in this 
passage to appanihita , aimless, not bent on anything; and s.v. appabhita 
(not terrified) gives this as Siamese conjecture (?) for the appaklna of this 

passage. I think the corruption, whatever it is, is due to a confusion of 
thought between (1) being unattached (to pleasures) and not aiming at them 
or directing the mind towards them, and (2) not being terrified, because of 
being aloof from them. 

* * /.e. without greed for the five sensory pleasures. 

4 vUadkuma, without smoke. 

5 spirit, as in Sn. 478, 876, yakkhassa suddhi, “ the cleansing of the spirit.” 

* a tula, which cannot be weighed, imponderable. 

7 sar&utha; c/. D. ii. 267. • Cf. MUn . 347. 

* “ Splendour ” and “ praise ” are both vanna . 



54 56. UpalisiUta I. 387 

But because Nataputta the Jain could not bear the eulogy of the 
Lord, then and there hot blood issued from his mouth. 1 

Discourse with Upali: 

The Sixth 


57. DISCOURSE ON THE CANINE ASCETIC 

(Kukkuravatikasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying among theKoli- 
yans; the market town of the Ko]iyans was called Haliddavasana. 2 
Then Punna, a Kojiyan who was a bovine ascetic, 3 and Seniya who 
was an unclothed canine ascetic, 4 approached the Lord; having 
approached, Punna the Koliyan who was the bovine ascetic, after 
greeting the Lord, sat down at a respectful distance. But Seniya 
the unclothed canine ascetic, having exchanged greetings with the 
Lord and conversed in a friendly and courteous way, sat down at a 
respectful distance doubling up like a dog. 6 As he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance, Punna the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic, spoke 
thus to the Lord : 

1 MA. iii. 99*100 says that he fell down, was taken outside the town on a 
litter and then on to PavS, where he died, for few beings are able to live after 
discharging blood. According to the tradition here, Nigantha Nataputta 
predeceased Gotama. M . Sta. 104 and D. Sta. 29, 33 all also agree that he 
died at Pava while Gotama was alive, but they do not agree upon where 
Gotama was at the time of Nataputta ’s death. 

2 At the time when it was building people wore golden coloured garments, 
haluMavatthanivaltha, to celebrate the “ lunar mansion.” Vasana means 
both a garment and a habitation. The name Haliddavasana occurs also at 
8. v. 115. 

3 govatika . Having undertaken the “ cow-practice,” go-vata, putting 
a horn on his head and tying on a tail, he went about grazing with cows, 
MA. iii. 100. 

4 kukkuravatika , having undertaken the “ dog-practice,” he did everything 
done by a dog. See D. iii. 6-7 for the habits of Korakkhattiya, the unclothed 
canine ascetic. 

6 MA. iii. 100, like a dog, sunakha, in his master's presence. Having 
scratched the ground with his two feet he sits down hunched, and greets the 
Lord by saying, “ I will do what a dog does ”; then having scratched the 
ground with his two hands, shaking his head, he says bhun bhun, and doubling 
in his hands and feet, he sits down like a dog. 




I. 387-388 


On the Canine Ascetic 


55 


44 Revered sir, this Seniya, an unclothed canine ascetic, is a doer of 
things hard to do — he eats lying on the ground, a canine practice 
which has been carried out in full by him for a long time. What is 
his bourn, 1 what his future state V* 

44 Enough, Pumia, let this be, do not ask me this.” And a second 
time . . . And a third time Pun#a the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic, 
spoke thus to the Lord: 44 Revered sir, this Seniya, an unclothed 
canine ascetic, is a doer of things hard to do— he eats lying on the 
ground, a canine practice which has been carried out in full by him 
for a long time. What is his bourn, what his future state ?” 

44 Although I, Pu^a, did not really countenance your (question) 
and said : * Enough, Pun^a, let this be, do not ask me this/ neverthe- 
less I will explain to you. Here, Pu^a, someone develops the canine 
practice completely and constantly, he develops the canine habits 2 
completely and constantly, he develops the canine mentality com- 
pletely [388] and constantly, he develops the canine behaviour 3 
completely and constantly. Having developed the canine practice 
. . . the canine habits . . . the canine mentality . . . the canine behaviour 
completely and constantly, he, on the breaking up of the body after 
dying, arises in companionship with dogs. But if he should have a 
view like this: 4 * 6 1, through this habit or practice or austerity or 
chastity, 4 will become a deva 6 or a (lesser) deva ’• — that is a wrong 
view on his part. I, Pui^a, say that there is one of two bourns for 
one of wrong view: either Niraya Hell or animal birth. So it is, 
Puwa, that the canine practice, on prospering, leads to companion- 
ship with dogs, on failing, to Niraya Hell.” 

When this had been said, Seniya the unclothed canine ascetic 
cried out and burst into tears. Then the Lord spoke thus to Pumta 
the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic: 

44 1 did not countenance this (question) of yours, Puni>a, (so) I 
said: 4 Enough, Piupjja, let this be, do not ask me this.* ” 

44 1, revered sir, am not crying because the Lord speaks thus about 
me. It is, revered sir, because this canine practice has been carried 


1 gati, going, destination, karmic course. 

2 kuklcurcmla. MA . iii. 101 explains as kukkurdcdra. 

3 kukkuralcappa, in standing, walking, sitting, lying down, baring the teeth 
on seeing actual dogs. 

4 So explained at MA. iii. 101. Brahmacariya is also the higher life. 

8 A Sakka or Suyama, etc. 

6 A certain deva in the second or third position. For devannatara , cf. S. 
iv. 180, A . iv. 461. 



56 


57. Kukkuravatikasutta 


I. 388-389 


out in full by me for a long time. Revered sir, this Punna the 
Koliyan is a bovine ascetic, and the bovine practice has been carried 
out in full by him for a long time. What is his bourn, what his 
future state % 9 

“ Enough, Seniya, let this be, do not ask me this.” And a second 

time And a third time Seniya the unclothed canine ascetic spoke 

thus to the Lord : “ Revered sir, this Punna the Koliyan is a bovine 
ascetic, and the bovine practice has been carried out in full by him 
for a long time. What is his bourn, what his future state ?” 

“ Although, Seniya, I did not really countenance your (question) 
and said : ‘ Enough, Seniya, let this be, do not ask me this,’ neverthe- 
less I will explain to you. Here, Seniya, someone develops the 
bovine practice completely and constantly, he develops the bovine 
habits completely and constantly, he develops the bovine mentality 
completely and constantly, he develops the bovine behaviour com- 
pletely and constantly. Having developed the bovine practice . , . 
the bovine habits . . . the bovine mentality . . . the bovine behaviour 
completely and constantly, he, on the breaking up of the body after 
dying, arises in companionship with cattle. But if [389] he should 
have a view like this: * I, through this habit or practice or austerity 
or chastity, will become a deva or a (lesser) deva ’ — that is a wrong 
view on his part. I, Seniya, say that there is one of two bourns for 
one of wrong view: either Niraya Hell or animal birth. So it is, 
Seniya, that the bovine practice, on prospering, leads to companion- 
ship with cattle, on failing, to Niraya Hell.” 

When this had been said, Punna the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic, 
cried out and. burst into tears. Then the Lord spoke thus to Seniya, 
the unclothed canine ascetic : 

“ I did not countenance this (question) of yours, Seniya, (so) I 
said: * Enough, Seniya, let this be, do not ask me this/ ” 

“ I, revered sir, am not crying because the Lord speaks thus about 
me. It is, revered sir, because this bovine practice has been carried 
out in full by me for a long time. Revered sir, I have trust 1 in the 
Lord thus: The Lord is able so to teach dhamma that I might give 
up this bovine practice, and Seniya the unclothed canine ascetic 
might give up that canine practice.” 

“ Well then, Punna, listen, pay careful attention, and I will speak.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” Punna the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic, answered 
the Lord in assent. The Lord spoke thus : 


1 pasanna, satisfaction, pleasure, approval, appreciation. 



I. 389-390 


On the Canine Ascetic 


57 


“ Punna, these four (kinds of) deeds 1 are made known by me, 
having realised them by my own super-knowledge. What four ? 
There is, Puima, the deed that is dark, dark in result. There is, 
Punna, the deed that is bright, bright in result. There is, Punna, 
the deed that is dark and bright, dark and bright in result. There 
is, Puni>a, the deed that is not dark (and) not bright, neither dark 
nor bright in result, the deed that conduces to the destruction of 
deeds. 2 

And what, Punna, is the deed that is dark, dark in result ? As to 
this, Punna, someone effects 3 an activity of body 4 that is harmful, he 
effects an activity of speech that is harmful, he effects an activity of 
mind that is harmful. He, having effected an activity of body that 
is harmful . . . activity of speech that is harmful, having effected an 
activity of mind that is harmful, arises in a world that is harmful. 
Because he has uprisen in a world that is harmful, harmful sensory 
impingements assail him. He, being assailed by harmful sensory 
impingements, experiences a harmful feeling, without exception 
painful, even as do creatures [390] in Niraya Hell. In this way, 6 
Punna, there is the uprising of a being from what has come to be 8 ; 
he uprises according to what he does 7 ; when he has uprisen sensory 
impingements assail him. So I speak thus, Pu$i>a: Creatures are 
heirs to deeds. 8 This, Punna, is called the deed that is dark, dark 
in result. 

And what, Punna, is the deed that is bright, bright in result ? As 
to this, Punna, someone effects an activity of body that is harmless 
... an activity of speech ... an activity of mind that is harmless. 
He, having effected an activity of body ... an activity of speech 
... an activity of mind that is harmless, arises in a world that is 
harmless. Because he has uprisen in a world that is harmless, 
harmless sensory impingements assail him. He, being assailed by 
harmless sensory impingements, experiences a harmless feeling, 
without exception pleasant, even as do the Ever-Radiant devas. In 
this way, Purina, there is the uprising of a being from what has come 

* See A ii. 230 and G.S. ii. 238 /.; cf . D. iii. 230, Netti. 98, 159, Asl 89. 

2 On the Jains’ mistaken conception of the importance and consequences 

of this, see Ml i. 93. 

* abhisankharoti . Cf. A . i. 122 /., ii. 230. 

* kdyasankhdra . Cf. M . i. 301 ; and see M.L.S. i. Intr. p. xxiv. 

* This sentence and the next are omitted at A . ii. 230, but occur at A . v. 
289 ff. 

* bhuta bhutassa upapalti hoii. 

7 Cf. Chdnd. Up. 5, 10. 7; Brhad. Up. 4. 4. 5. * Cf. A. iii. 72, 186, v. 289. 



58 57. Kukhuravatihasutta I. 300-391 

to be ; he uprises according to what he does ; when he has uprisen 
sensory impingements assail him. So I speak thus, Pu$$a : Creatures 
are heirs to deeds. This, Puutta, is called the deed that is bright, 
bright in result. 

And what, Pumia, is the deed that is dark and bright, dark and 
bright in result ? As to this, Punna, someone effects an activity of 
body that is harmful and harmless ... an activity of speech ... an 
activity of mind that is harmful and harmless. He, having effected 
an activity of body ... an activity of speech ... an activity of mind 
that is harmful and harmless, arises in a world that is harmful and 
harmless. Because he has uprisen in a world that is harmful and 
harmless, harmful and harmless sensory impingements assail him. 
He, being assailed by harmful and harmless sensory impingements, 
experiences a feeling that is harmful and harmless, partially pleasant 
and painful, even as do men and some devas and some in the sorrow- 
ful state. 1 In this way, Pu^a, there is the uprising of a being from 
what has come to be; he uprises according to what he does; when he 
has uprisen sensory impingements assail him. So I speak thus, 
Pu$$a: Creatures are heirs to deeds. 2 This, Pun$a, is called the 
deed that is dark and bright, dark and bright in result. 

[391] And what, Pu^a, is the deed that is not dark (and) not 
bright, neither dark nor bright in result, the deed that conduces to 
the destruction of deeds ? Where, Purina, there is the will 3 to get 
rid of that deed that is dark, dark in result, and the will to get rid of 
that deed that is bright, bright in result, and the will to get rid of that 
deed that is dark and bright, dark and bright in result, this, Punna, 
is called the deed that is not dark (and) not bright, neither dark nor 
bright in result, the deed that conduces to the destruction of deeds. 
These, Puooa, are the four (kinds of) deeds made known by me, 
having realised them by my own super-knowledge.* * 

When this had been said, Punna the Koliyan, the bovine ascetic, 
spoke thus to the Lord: “ It is excellent, revered sir, it is excellent, 
revered sir. It is as if, revered sir . , . May the Lord accept me as a 
lay-disciple going for refuge from this day forth for as long as life 
lasts.” 

But Seniya the unclothed canine ascetic spoke thus to the Lord : 
“ It is excellent, revered sir, it is excellent, revered sir. It is as if, 
revered sir, one might set upright what had been upset, or might 

1 Cf. M . i. 73, of those of spontaneous uprising. 

* This paragraph, except the first and last sentences, is quoted at Kvu. 522. 

* ceiand . 



I. 391-392 


On the Canine Ascetic 


59 


disclose what was covered, or show the way to one who had gone 
astray, or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with 
vision might see material shapes — even so in many a figure has 
dhamma been made clear by the Lord. Thus I, revered sir, am going 
to the Lord for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. 
Revered sir, may I receive the going forth in the Lord’s presence, 
may I receive ordination V 9 

“ Seniya, if a former member of another sect wishes for the going 
forth in this dhamma and discipline, wishes for ordination, he under- 
takes probation for four months 1 ; at the end of the four months the 
monks, if they so decide, may let him go forth, may ordain him into 
the status of a monk; but even here differences among individuals 
are known to me.” 2 

“ If, revered sir, former members of other sects, wishing for the 
going forth in this dhamma and discipline, wishing for ordination, 
undertake probation for four months, and if at the end of the four 
months the monks, if they so decide, let them go forth, ordain them 
into the status of a monk, then will I undertake probation for four 
years 3 ; at the end of the four years the monks, if they so decide, may 
let me go forth, may ordain me into the status of a monk/’ But 
Seniya, the unclothed canine ascetic, received the going forth in the 
Lord’s presence, he received ordination. 4 5 

Soon after he was ordained the venerable Seniya, dwelling alone, 
aloof, [392] diligent, ardent, self-resolute, in no long time having 
realised here-now by his own super-knowledge that matchless 
culmination of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men 
of family rightly go forth from home into homelessness, entering on 
it, abided in it. And he knew: Destroyed is birth, brought to a close 
the Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of 
being such or so. So was the venerable Seniya one of the perfected 
ones. 

Discourse on the Canine Ascetic : 

The Seventh 


1 Laid down at Vin. i, 09. See also M. i, 494, 512; D . i. 176; 8 . ii. 21; 

Sn. p. 101-102. 

* One meriting probation but not another, MA . iii. 106; Vin A. v. 990. For 

as 8nA. ii. 436 (citing Vin. i. 71) points out, the fire-worshipping matted hair 
ascetics are exempt from the four months' probation. 

5 The same willingness to undertake probation for four years, instead of 
the four prescribed months, is manifested e.g. by Vacchagotta at M. i. 494, 
and Magandiya at M . i. 512. 

* MA. iii. 106 says that the Lord thought that Seniya, on account of his 



58. DISCOURSE TO PRINCE ABHAYA 

( Abhayara j akumarasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At oiie time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding place. Then Prince 
Abhaya 1 approached Nataputta the Jain ; having approached, having 
greeted Nataputta the Jain, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
Nataputta the Jain spoke thus 2 to Prince Abhaya as he was sitting 
down at a respectful distance : 44 Come you, Prince, refute the recluse 
Gotama so that a lovely reputation goes forth about you to the effect 
that the recluse Gotama, of such great psychic power, of such great 
majesty, was refuted by Prince Abhaya.” 

“ But how can I, revered sir, refute the recluse Gotama who is of 
such great psychic power, of such great majesty V* 

“Come you, Prince, approach the recluse Gotama; having 
approached, speak thus to the recluse Gotama ; 4 Now, revered sir, 
could a Tathagata utter a speech that is disliked by others, disagree- 
able to them?’ If the recluse Gotama on being questioned by you 
thus should answer: 4 Prince, a Tathagata could utter a speech that 
is disliked by others, disagreeable to them/ then you should speak to 
him thus; 4 But then, where is the difference, revered sir, between 
you and an average person? For an average person could also 
utter a speech that is disliked by others, disagreeable to them/ But 
if the recluse Gotama, on being questioned thus by you, should 
answer: 4 Prince, a Tathagata could not utter a speech [393] that is 
disliked by others, disagreeable to them/ then you should speak to 
him thus; 4 Then how is it, revered sir, that when Devadatta was 
told by you : 44 Devadatta is doomed to a sorrowful way 3 (after death), 


1 Son of King Bimbisara. * Cf. S. iv. 323. 

* dpayikd, a nian in “ Misery.” These and the following three expressions 
are also found at Fin. ii. 202, It p. 85, A. iii. 402, iv. 160, etc. Cf, Vin . Texts 
m, 262, n. 3. 


keen desire, did not merit probation. But he was not ordained (by the Lord 
himself) by the ehi bhikkhu formula; he was “received” or allowed to go 
forth by a monk acting on the Lord’s instructions, and then brought into 
the Lord’s presence. 


60 



I. 393 


To Prince Abhaya Cl 

Devadatta is doomed to Niraya Hell, Devadatta is fixed for a kalpa, 1 
Devadatta is incurable ,” 2 Devadatta was angry and displeased with 
you for these words?’ Prince, the recluse Gotama, on being asked 
this double-edged question 3 by you will neither be able to spew out 
nor swallow down 4 (the puzzle). Just like an iron hook stuck in a 
man’s throat that he can neither spew out nor swallow down, even 
so, Prince, the recluse Gotama, on being asked this double-edged 
question by you, will neither be able to spew out nor swallow down 
(the puzzle).” 

“ Very well, revered sir,” and Prince Abhaya having answered 
Nataputta the Jain in assent, rising from his seat, having greeted 
Nataputta the Jain keeping his right side towards him, approached 
the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down 
at a respectful distance. After looking at the sun, it occurred to 
Prince Abhaya as he was sitting down at a respectful distance: “ It 
is not the right time today to refute the Lord, but tomorrow I, in 
my own house, will refute the Lord,” and he spoke thus to the Lord : 
“ Revered sir, may the Lord consent to take a meal with me on the 
morrow with three others ?”* The Lord consented by becoming 
silent. Then Prince Abhaya, having understood the Lord’s consent, 
rising from his seat, having greeted the Lord, departed keeping his 
right side towards him. Then the Lord, at the end of that night, 
having dressed in the early morning, taking his bowl and robe, 
approached Prince Abhaya’s dwelling; having approached, he sat 
down on the appointed seat. Then Prince Abhaya with his own 
hand served and satisfied the Lord with sumptuous solid and soft 

1 kappayha , endures for an eon in these states (Misery and Hell), incapable 
of winning out of them to happier births during this eon, kappa, 

* atekkcha . Mrs. Rhys Davids, Q.S. iii, p. xiv refers to atekiccha as having 
41 the fearful implication, possibly monkish, of a Buddhist hell that is 
unending,” or, as MA. iii. 108 says, buddhasahassena, while a thousand 
Buddhas come and go. Certainly the Hell, for Devadatta, endures as long 
as the kalpa, but the kalpa, as in Hindu philosophy, is regarded as subject to 
44 involution,’ 4 absorption, rest, before it evolves or manifests again — and 
endlessly again. Only the major, almost symbolical events are repeated in 
each kalpa; the details vary, so after this kalpa Devadatta is no longer doomed 
to states of misery and Hell. 

1 Cf, Miln. 108, 162; K.S. iv. 229, n, f 44 the horns of a dilemma.” 

* C/. MUn, 5. 

* attacatuitho, himself as the fourth, as at if. iii. 145, A, iii. 36. MA . iii. 109 
says Abhaya did not ask more in case they quarrelled, nor did he ask them 
individually lest he was reproached for miserliness, but he compromised by 
asking three with Gotama as the fourth. 



I. 393-395 


02 58. Abhayarajakumdrasutta 

foods. Then when the Lord had eaten and had withdrawn his hand 
from the bowl, Prince Abhaya, taking a low seat, sat down at a 
respectful distance. Prince Abhaya, sitting down at a respectful 
distance, spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ Now, revered sir, could a Tathagata utter a speech disliked by 
others, disagreeable to them?” 

“ Is not this one-sided, 1 Prince?” 

“ At this point, revered sir, the Jains have lost.” 2 

“ Why do you speak thus, Prince : [ 394 ] 1 At this point, revered sir, 
the Jains have lost’ ?” 

“Now, I, revered sir, approached Nataputta the Jain; having 
approached, having greeted Nataputta the Jain, I sat down at a 
respectful distance. Nataputta the Jain spoke thus to me, revered 
sir, as I was sitting down at a respectful distance: * Come you, 
Prince, refute the recluse Gotama ... (as above ) . . . Just like an iron 
hook stuck in a man’s throat that he can neither spew out nor 
swallow down, even so, Prince, the recluse Gotama, on being asked 
this double-edged question by you, will neither be able to spew out 
nor swallow down (the puzzle).’ ” 

At that time an innocent little baby boy was lying on its back 3 
on Prince Abhaya’s knees. Then the Lord spoke thus to Prince 
Abhaya: “ What [ 395 ] do you think about this, Prince ? If this 
boy owing to your carelessness or that of his nurse were to put a 
stick or stone into his mouth, what would you do for him ?” 

“ I would get it out, revered sir. And if I, revered sir, were not 
able to get it out at once, then taking hold of his head with my left 
hand, crooking a finger, I would get it out with my right hand, even 
though it were with blood. What is the reason for this ? Revered 
sir, I have compassion for the boy.” 

“ Even so, Prince, whatever speech the Tathagata knows to be not 
fact, not true, not connected with the goal, and that is not liked by 
others, disagreeable to them, that speech the Tathagata does not 
utter. And whatever speech a Tathagata knows to be fact, true, 
but not connected with the goal, and not liked by others, disagree- 


1 ekamsena. No doubt referring to the two-edged question the Jains 
planned to ask Gotama so as to trip him up. Of. ekariisavado at M . ii. 197. 

* ana s sum f are frustrated. MA. iii. 109 says nattha , lost, destroyed, 
perished. The meaning is that in view of this counter-question of Gotama’s, 
the Jains are already defeated as the further questions they had devised 
would now be meaningless. 

• CJ. A. iii. 6. For the rpening phrase, r/. M . i. 324, ii. 24. 




I. 395-396 To Prince Abhaya 63 

able to them, neither does the Tathagata utter that speech. And 
whatever speech the Tathagata knows to be fact, true, connected 
with the goal, but not liked by others, disagreeable to them, the 
Tathagata is aware of the right time for explaining that speech. 
Whatever speech the Tathagata knows to be not fact, not true, not 
connected with the goal, but that is liked by others, agreeable to 
them, that speech the Tathagata does not utter. And whatever 
speech the Tathagata knows to be fact, true, but not connected with 
the goal, yet liked by others, agreeable to them, neither does the 
Tathagata utter that speech. And whatever speech the Tathagata 
knows to be fact, true, connected with the goal, and liked by others, 
agreeable to them, the Tathagata is aware of the right time for 
explaining that speech. What is the reason for this ? It is, Prince, 
that the Tathagata has compassion for creatures.” 

“ Revered sir, if those who are learned nobles and learned brahmans 
and learned householders and learned recluses approach the Tatha- 
gata and ask him a question they have constructed — has the Lord 
already reflected in his mind on this, thinking: * Whoever, having 
approached me, questions me like this, then, asked thus, I will answer 
them thus,’ or does (the answer) occur to a Tathagata immediately V n 

“ Well then, Prince, I will ask you a question in return. As it 
may please you, so may you answer it. What do you think about 
this, Prince ? Are you skilled in the various parts of a chariot V* 

“ Yes, revered sir, I am skilled in the various parts of a chariot.” 

“ What do you think about this, Prince ? If those who have 
approached you should ask thus : ‘ What is the name of this particular 
part of the chariot V would you have already [396] reflected on this in 
your mind, thinking: * If those who have approached me should ask 
thus, then I will answer them thus,’ or would (the answer) occur to 
you immediately?” 

“ Because, revered sir, I am a renowned charioteer, skilled in the 
various parts of a chariot, all the particular parts of a chariot are 
fully known to me, so (the answer) would occur to me immediately.” 

“ Even so, Prince, if those who are learned nobles and learned 
brahmans and learned householders and learned recluses approach 
the Tathagata and ask him a question they have constructed, (the 
answer) occurs to the Tathagata immediately. What is the reason 


1 thanaso , both on the spot {thdnuppattika) and at that moment (tam 
khanam). It means “ without an interval or a cause (of change), at once, 
immediately, spontaneously, impromptu.” P.E.D. 



64 58. Abhayardjakumarasutta I. 396 

for this ? It is, Prince, that the constitution of dhamma 1 is fully 
penetrated by the Tathagata, and because of his full penetration of 
the constitution of dhamma (the answer) occurs to the Tathagata 
immediately. ,, 

When this had been said, Prince Abhaya spoke thus to the Lord : 
“ It is excellent, revered sir, it is excellent, revered sir. It is as if 
one might set upright what had been upset, or might disclose what 
had been covered, or show the way to one who had gone astray, or 
bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with vision might 
see material shapes, even so is dhamma made clear in many a figure 
by the Lord. I, revered sir, am going to the Lord for refuge and to 
dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the Lord accept me as a 
lay-disciple going for refuge from this day forth for as long as life 
lasts.” 

Discourse to Prince Abhaya : 

The Eighth 


59. DISCOURSE ON MUCH TO BE 
EXPERIENCED 

(Bahuvedaniyasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near SavatthI 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapincjika’s monastery. Then 2 Five- 
tools, 3 the carpenter, approached the venerable Udayin 4 ; having 
approached, having greeted the venerable Udayin, he sat down at a 
respectful distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, 
Fivetools, the carpenter, spoke thus to the venerable Udayin : 


1 The word dhammadhatu , as the ultimate principle or own -nature, own- 
being, self-nature, of dhamma occurs also at D. ii. 8. It is explained at 
MA. iii. 113 aB dhammasabhdva . At S. ii. 143, Nelli. 64, Vism. 486 it would 
seem to be used in the sense of mental state considered as an irreducible 
element, c/. Dhs. 67, 69, Vbh . 87, 89. For a more detailed discussion of the 
Buddha's “ power of immediate response,” see A. K. Coomaraswamy, Some 
Pali Words , H.J.A.S. , vol. IV, No. 2, July 1939, p. 188. 

2 As at S. iv. 223 ff. 

9 See K.S. iv. 149, n. 2. Pancakanga also found at M. ii. 23, iii. 144. 
His five tools are enumerated at MA . iii. 114 and 3A. iii. 79. 

4 MA. iii. 114 calls him pamlita-Udayitthera , the learned Elder Udayin. 



I. 396-397 On Much to be Experienced 65 

“ Now, revered Udayin, how many feelings are spoken of by the 
Lord?” 

“ Three, householder, 1 are the feelings that are spoken of by the 
Lord: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, feeling that is neither painful 
nor pleasant. [397] These, householder, are the three feelings spoken 
of by the Lord.” 

“ Revered Udayin, three feelings are not spoken of by the Lord. 
Two feelings are spoken of by the Lord : pleasant feeling, painful 
feeling. Revered sir, that feeling which is neither painful nor 
pleasant, that is spoken of by the Lord as belonging to exquisite 
happiness.” 

And a second time the venerable Udayin spoke thus to Fivetools, 
the carpenter: “ Householder, two feelings are not spoken of by the 
Lord; three feelings are spoken of by the Lord: pleasant feeling, 
painful feeling, feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant. These, 
householder, are the three feelings spoken of by the Lord.” 

And a second time Fivetools the carpenter spoke thus to the vener- 
able Udayin: “ Revered Udayin, three feelings are not spoken of by 
the Lord . . . that is spoken of by the Lord as belonging to exquisite 
happiness.” 

And a third time the venerable Udayin spoke thus to Fivetools the 
carpenter: 

“ Householder, two feelings are not spoken of by the Lord . . . 
These, householder, are the three feelings spoken of by the Lord.” 

And a third time Fivetools the carpenter spoke thus to the 
venerable Udayin: “ Revered Udayin, three feelings are not spoken 
of by the Lord. Two feelings are spoken of by the Lord: pleasant 
feeling, painful feeling. Revered sir, that feeling which is neither 
painful nor pleasant, that is spoken of by the Lord as belonging to 
exquisite happiness.” So neither was the venerable Udayin able to 
convince Fivetools the carpenter, nor was Fivetools the carpenter 
able to convince the venerable Udayin. 

Now, the venerable Ananda overheard this conversation between 
the venerable Udayin and Fivetools the carpenter. Then the 
venerable Ananda approached the Lord ; having approached, having 
greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. Seated at 
a respectful distance, the venerable Ananda told the Lord the whole 
of the conversation between the venerable Udayin and Fivetools the 


1 S. iv. 223 /. reads thapali , carpenter, for Majjkima's gahapati , house- 
holder. 



66 59. Bahuvedaniyasutia I. 397-398 

carpenter as far as it went. 1 When this had been said, the Lord 
spoke thus to the venerable Ananda : 

“ Although, Ananda, Udayin’s classification 2 was right, Fivetools 
the carpenter disagreed; and although Fivetools the carpenter’s 
classification was right, Udayin disagreed. Ananda, two feelings 3 
are spoken of by me [398] according to (one) classification, and three 
feelings 4 * are spoken of by me according to (one) classification, and 
five feelings 8 . . . and six feelings 6 . . , and eighteen feelings 7 . . , and 
thirty-six feelings 8 . , . and one hundred and eight feelings 9 are 
spoken of by me according to (one) classification. Thus, Ananda, 
is dhamma taught by me according to classification. As dhamma is 
taught by me thus, Ananda, according to classification, of those who 
will not accede to, approve of or accept what has been well said, well 
spoken by each other, this is to be expected: that they will live 
wrangling, quarrelsome, disputatious, wounding one another with 
the weapons of the tongue. 10 Thus, Ananda, is dhamma taught by 
me according to classification. As dhamma is taught by me thus, 
Ananda, according to classification, of those who will accede to, 
approve of and accept what has been well said, well spoken by each 
other, this is to be expected: that they will live all together on 
friendly terms and harmonious as milk and water blend, regarding 
one another with the eye of affection. 11 

Ananda, there are these five strands of sense-pleasures. 12 What 
are the five ? Material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, 
pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. 
Sounds cognisable by the ear . . . Smells cognisable by the nose . . . 


1 ydvatako , cf. M . i. 374. 

8 pariydya , explained by karana at MA. iii. 114. 

s Bodily and mental, MA. iii. 114 quoting 8 . iv. 231. 

* The three beginning with pleasant (feeling), MA. iii. 1 14 quoting 8. iv. 232. 
6 The five indriyas , beginning with that which is pleasant, MA. iii. 114 

quoting 8. iv. 232; cf. also 8. v. 207. 

6 Six sensory impingements, by way of the doors (of the senses), beginning 
with the eye, MA. iii. 114 quoting 8. iv. 232. 

7 The six ways of attending to material shape founded on happiness, the 

six founded on grief, the six founded on indifference (or, equanimity). 

* The six forma of happiness connected with the household life, the six 

connected with renunciation; the six forms of misery connected with the 
household life, the six with renunciation; the six “ indifferences ” of a house- 
holder, the six of renunciation, MA. iii. 114 quoting 8. iv. 232. 

* In the past, the future and in the present; each thirty -six feelings. Cf. 
the 18, 36 and 108 ‘ 4 thoughts ” at A . ii. 212. 

16 Cf. Ud. 67, etc. « As at M . i. 206. 


18 As at M. i. 85, 02, 454. 



I. 398-399 On Much to be Experienced 67 

Tastes cognisable by the tongue . . , Touches cognisable by the 
body, agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual 
pleasures, alluring. These, Ananda, are the five strands of sense- 
pleasures. Whatever happiness, whatever joy, Ananda, arises in 
consequence of these five strands of sense-pleasures, it is called 
happiness in sense-pleasures. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus: ‘ This is the highest 
happiness and joy that creatures experience ’—this I cannot allow 
on his part. What is the reason for this ? There is, Ananda, 
another happiness more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 1 
And what, Ananda, is this other happiness more excellent and 
exquisite than that happiness ? Here, Ananda, a monk, aloof from 
pleasures of the senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters 
and abides in the first meditation that is accompanied by initial 
thought and discursive thought, is born of aloofness and is rapturous 
and joyful. This, Ananda, is the other happiness that is more 
excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus: * This is the highest happi- 
ness and joy that creatures experience ’ — this I cannot allow on his 
part [399]. What is the reason for this ? There is, Ananda, another 
happiness more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. And 
what, Ananda, is this other happiness more excellent and exquisite 
than that happiness? Here, Ananda, a monk, by allaying initial 
thought and discursive thought, his mind inwardly tranquillised and 
fixed on one point, enters and abides in the second meditation which 
is devoid of initial and discursive thought, is bom of concentration, 
and is rapturous and joyful. This, Ananda, is the other happiness 
that is more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . . . And what, Ananda, is 
this other happiness more excellent and exquisite than that happiness? 
Here, Ananda, a monk, by the fading out of rapture, abides with 
equanimity, attentive and clearly conscious, and he experiences in 
his person that happiness of which the ariyans say: ‘ Joyful lives he 
who has equanimity and is mindful.’ And entering 0 ft the third 
meditation he abides in it. This, Ananda, is the other happiness 
that is more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . , . And what, Ananda, is 
this other happiness more excellent and exquisite than that 
happiness ? Here, Ananda, a monk, by getting rid of happiness and 


1 Cf. M . i. 247. 



68 


I. 399-400 


69. Bahuvedaniyasutta 

by getting rid of anguish, by the going down of his former pleasures 
and sorrows, enters and abides in the fourth meditation which has 
neither anguish nor happiness, and which is entirely purified by 
equanimity and mindfulness. This, Ananda, is the other happiness 
that is more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . . . And what, Ananda is this 
other happiness more excellent and exquisite than that happiness ? 
Here, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcending perceptions of 
material shapes, by the going down of perceptions due to sensory 
impressions, by not attending to perceptions of difference, thinking: 
4 Ether is unending/ enters and abides in the plane of infinite ether. 
This, Ananda, is the other happiness that is more excellent and 
exquisite than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . , . And what, Ananda, is 
this other happiness more excellent and exquisite than that 
happiness? Here, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcending the 
plane of infinite ether and thinking: * Consciousness is unending/ 
enters and abides in the plane of infinite consciousness. This, 
Ananda, is the other happiness that is more excellent and exquisite 
than that happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . . . And what, Ananda, is 
this other happiness more excellent and exquisite than that happiness? 
Here, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcending the plane of infinite 
consciousness, and thinking: ‘ There is no thing/ enters and abides 
in the plane of no-thing. This, Ananda, is the other happiness that 
is more excellent and exquisite than that happiness. 

[400] Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus . . . And what, 
Ananda, is this other happiness more excellent and exquisite than 
that happiness ? Here, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcend- 
ing the plane of no-thing, enters and abides in the plane of 
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. This, Ananda, is the 
other happiness that is more excellent and exquisite than that 
happiness. 

Whoever, Ananda, should speak thus: * This is the highest 
happiness and joy that creatures experience ’ — this I cannot allow 
on his part. What is the reason for this ? There is, Ananda, 
another happiness more excellent and exquisite tha that happiness. 
And what, Ananda, is this other happiness more excellent and 
exquisite than that happiness ? Here, Ananda, a monk, by wholly 
transcending the plane of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, 
enters and abides in the stopping of perceiving and feeling. This, 



I* 400-401 On Much to be Experienced 69 

Ananda, is the other happiness that is more excellent and exquisite 
than that happiness. 

But the situation occurs, Ananda, when wanderers belonging to 
other sects may speak thus : 4 The recluse Gotama speaks of the stop- 
ping of perceiving and feeling, and lays down that this belongs to 
happiness. Now what is this, now how is this?* Ananda, wan- 
derers belonging to other sects who speak thus should be spoken to 
thus: 4 Your reverences, the Lord does not lay down that it is only 
pleasant feeling that belongs to happiness; for, your reverences, the 
Tathagata lays down that whenever, wherever, whatever happiness 
is found it belongs to happiness.’ ” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Ananda rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on Much to be Experienced : 

The Ninth 


60, DISCOURSE ON THE SURE 

(Apanoakasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord, walking on tour among the 
Kosalans together with a large Order of monks, 1 arrived at the 
brahman village of the Kosalans named Sala. The brahman house- 
holders of Sala heard: “ It is said that the recluse Gotama, the son 
of the Sakyans, gone forth from the Sakyan family, and walking on 
tour among the Kosalans [401] together with a large Order of monks, 
has reached Sala, and that a lovely reputation has gone forth about 
the Lord Gotama thus : * The Lord is perfected, wholly Self-awakened, 
endowed with (right) knowledge and conduct, well-faror, knower of 
the worlds, incomparable charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of 
devas and men, the Awakened One, the Lord. He makes known 
this world with the devas, with Mara, with Brahma, creation with its 
recluses and brahmans, its devas and men, having realised them by 
his own super-knowledge. He teaches dhamma that is lovely at the 


1 Down to where the Lord begins to speak is the same as at M. i. 285. 



70 60. AjMtyyakasutta I. 401-402 

beginning, lovely in the middle, lovely at the ending, with the spirit 
and the letter; he proclaims the Brahma-faring wholly fulfilled, 
quite purified. It were good to see perfected ones like this.* ” 

Then the brahman householders of Sala approached the Lord; 
some, having approached, having greeted the Lord, sat down at a 
respectful distance; some exchanged greetings with the Lord and 
having conversed in a friendly and courteous way, sat down at a 
respectful distance ; some, having saluted the Lord with joined palms, 
sat down at a respectful distance ; some, having made known their 
names and clans in the Lord’s presence, sat down at a respectful 
distance; some, becoming silent, sat down at a respectful distance. 
As they were sitting down at a respectful distance, the Lord spoke 
thus to the brahman householders of Sala: 

“ Have you, householders, some satisfactory teacher in whom your 
faith is grounded ?” 

“ We have no satisfactory teacher, revered sir, in whom our faith 
is grounded.” 

“ If you, householders, have no satisfactory teacher, then taking 
up this sure 1 dhamma you should practise it. For, householders, 
sure is dhamma ; rightly undertaken, it will long be for your welfare 
and happiness. And what, householders, is this sure dhamma ? 

There are, householders, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of these views 2 : * There is no (result of) gift, there is no 
(result of) offering, no (result of) sacrifice; there is no fruit or 
ripening of deeds well done or ill done ; there is not this world, there 
is not a world beyond; there is no (benefit from serving) mother or 
father; there are no spontaneously arising beings; there are not in 
the world recluses and brahmans who are faring rightly, proceeding 
rightly, and who proclaim this world and a world beyond, having 
realised them by their own super-knowledge.’ But, householders, 
there are [402] some recluses and brahmans who speak in direct 
opposition to these recluses and brahmans, and who say this: 

• There is (result of) gift, there is (result of) offering, there is (result 
of) sacrifice ; there is fruit and ripening of deeds well done and ill done ; 
there is this world, there is a world beyond; there is (benefit from 
serving) mother and father; there are spontaneously uprising beings; 
there are in the world recluses and brahmans who are faring rightly, 
proceeding rightly, and who proclaim this world and a world beyond, 

1 aparynaka, Cf, . A . i. 113, ii. 76 ( apannakatd patipada ), and see notes at 
G.S . i. 97, ii. 85. 

* As at if. i. 287. 



I. 402-403 


On the Sure 


71 


having realised them by their own super-knowledge.’ What do you 
think about this, householders ? Do not these recluses and brah- 
mans speak in direct opposition to one another V n 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ As to this, householders, of those recluses and brahmans who 
speak thus and are of these views: * There is no (result of) gift . . . 
having realised them by their own super-knowledge/ this is to be 
expected for them: Having laid aside these three good things: right 
conduct of body, right conduct of speech, right conduct of thought, 
and taking up these three bad things: wrong conduct of body, wrong 
conduct of speech, wrong conduct of thought, they practise them. 
What is the reason for this ? It is that these worthy recluses and 
brahmans do not see the peril in wrong things, the vanity, the 
defilement, nor the advantage, allied to purity, of renouncing them 
for the good things. And because there is indeed a world beyond, 
the view of anyone that there is not a world beyond is a false view of 
his. As there is indeed a world beyond, if anyone has the concep- 
tion that there is not a world beyond, it is a false conception of his. 
As there is indeed a world beyond, if anyone utters the speech: 
* There is not a world beyond,’ it is a false speech of his. As there 
is indeed a world beyond, if anyone says that there is not a world 
beyond, he makes mock of those perfected ones who are knowers 
of a world beyond. As there is indeed a world beyond, if he con- 
vinces others that there is not a world beyond, that convincing of his 
is against true dhamma , and because of that convincing which is 
against true dhamma , he is exalting himself and disparaging others. 
Indeed, before his good morality is got rid of, bad morality is set up. 
And this false view, false conception, false speech, the mocking of the 
ariyans, the convincing which is against true dhamma, the exalting 
of oneself, the disparaging of others — these are a variety of evil, 
unskilled states that arise thus because of false view. 

[ 403 ] Hereupon, 2 householders, an intelligent man reflects thus: 
‘ If there is not a world beyond, this worthy individual at the 
breaking up of the body will make himself safe ; 3 but if there is 
a world beyond, this worthy individual at the breaking up of the 
body after dying, will arise in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the 
downfall, Niraya Hell. But if it be granted that there is not a 
world beyond, if this is a true speech of these recluses and brahmans, 


1 As at D. i. 1. 

* MA. iii. 117 “ among the views of those recluses and brahmans.” 

3 sotthim attanam karissati. MA, iii. 117 does not explain. Cf. M. i. 353. 



72 GO. Apawiakasutta I. 403-404 

then the worthy individual is condemned here and now by intelligent 
persons who say: ‘Of bad moral habit is the individual, of false view, 
he holds the theory of “ There is not ’V 1 But if there is indeed a 
world beyond, thus is there defeat 2 in two ways for this worthy 
individual : inasmuch as he is condemned here and now by intelligent 
persons, and inasmuch as at the breaking up of the body after dying 
he will uprise in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the downfall, Niraya 
Hell. Thus this sure dhamma has been undertaken imperfectly by 
him, he has applied himself one-sidedly, 3 he is neglecting the skilled 
stance. 4 

Hereupon, householders, of those recluses and brahmans who 
speak thus and are of these views : ‘ There is (result of) gift, . . . having 
realised them by their own super-knowledge,’ this is to be expected 
of them: Having laid aside these three bad things: wrong conduct of 
body, wrong conduct of speech, wrong conduct of thought, and taking 
up these three good things : right conduct of body, right conduct of 
speech, right conduct of thought, they practise them. What is the 
reason for this ? It is that these worthy recluses and brahmans see 
the peril, the vanity, the defilement in wrong things, and the advan- 
tage, allied to purity, of renouncing them for states that are good. 
And because there is indeed a world beyond, the view of anyone that 
there is a world beyond is a right view of his. As there is indeed a 
world beyond, if anyone has the conception 5 that there is a world 
beyond it is a right conception 8 of his. As there is indeed a world 
beyond, if anyone utters the speech: ‘ There is a world beyond,’ it 
is a right speech of his. As there is indeed a world beyond, if anyone 
says that there is a world beyond, he does not make mock of those 
perfected ones who are knowers of the world beyond. As there is 
indeed a world beyond, if he convinces others that there is a world 
beyond, [ 404 ] that convincing of his is according to true dhamma , 
and because of this convincing which is in accordance with true 
dhamma , he does not exalt just himself, he does not disparage others. 
Indeed, before his bad morality is got rid of, good morality is set up. 
And this right view, right conception, right speech, this non-mocking 
of the ariyans, the convincing which is in accordance with true 
dhamma, the non-exalting of self, the non-disparaging of others 

1 natihikavada , a “ there-is-not-ist.” 

2 kaliggaha , the losing throw at dice. 8 Intent on his own theory, 

4 thdna , occasion, situation, position. 6 sankappeii . 

* sammdmnkappa. See table of attempts to translate this word at 

Mrs. Rhys Davids, Sakya, p. 85. 



I. 404 On the Sure 73 

— these are a variety of good states that arise because of right 
view. 

Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus : 1 * * 4 * If 
there is a world beyond, this worthy individual at the breaking up of 
the body after dying will arise in a good bourn, a heaven world. But 
if it be granted that there is not a world beyond, if this is a true 
speech of these recluses and brahmans, then this worthy individual 
is praised here and now by intelligent persons who say: 4 Of good 
moral habit is the individual, of right view, he holds the theory of 
“ There is.” 1 But if there is indeed a world beyond, thus is there 
victory 2 in two ways for this worthy individual: inasmuch as he is 
praised here and now by intelligent persons, and inasmuch as at the 
breaking up of the body after dying he will uprise in a good bourn, 
a heaven world. Thus this sure dhamma has been undertaken 
perfectly by him, he has applied himself two-sidedly, 3 he is neglecting 
the unskilled stance. 

There are, householders, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of these views: 4 * From doing, 6 from making (another) 
do, from mutilating, from making (another) mutilate, from threat- 
ening, from making (another) threaten, from causing grief, from 
tormenting, from torturing, from making (another) torture, from 
making onslaught on creatures, from taking what is not given, from 
house-breaking, from plundering, from robbery, from waiting in 
ambush, from going after other men’s wives, from lying speech — 
from acting (thus) evil is not done. If anyone with a discus having 
an edge sharp as a razor should make the creatures of this earth into 
one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, from that source there is not 
evil, there is not the perpetuating 6 of evil. And if anyone should go 
to the south bank of the Ganges 7 slaying and striking, mutilating, 
making (others) mutilate, threatening, making (others) threaten, 
from that source there is not evil, there is not the perpetuating of 
evil. And if he should go to the north bank of the Ganges 8 giving, 

1 He is an Affirmationist, a “ there-is-ist,” atthikavada. 

* Icafaggaha , the winning throw at dice. 

* MA. iii. 118, intent on his own theory and that of others. 

4 As at M . r. 516; 8. iii. 208; at D . i. 52 attributed to Purana Kassapa. 

§ MA. iii. 118, “ with the hand.” 

* dgatna , the handing down, tradition; cf, agabugama as at Vin. iv. 158: one 
to whom the tradition has been handed down. 

7 People here are rough and cruel, MA. iii. 119. 

8 People here have faith and are believing, devoted to the Buddha, dhamma 
and the Order. 



74 60. Apannakasutta I. 404-405 

making (others) give, offering, making (others) offer, from that 
source there is not merit, there is not the perpetuating of merit. 
There is no merit from giving, from taming oneself, from restrain- 
ing oneself, from truth-speaking, there is not the perpetuating of 
merit.’ Householders, some recluses and brahmans speak in direct 
opposition to these recluses and brahmans, [405] they speak thus: 
‘ From doing, from making (another) do . . . from lying . . . from 
acting (thus) evil is done. If any one with a discus having an edge 
sharp as a razor should make the creatures of this earth into one 
heap of flesh, one mass of flesh, from that source there is evil, there 
is the perpetuating of evil. And if anyone should go to the south 
bank of the Ganges slaying and striking . . . from that source there is 
evil, there is the perpetuating of evil. And if he should go to the 
north bank of the Ganges giving, making (others) give . . . from that 
source there is merit, there is the perpetuating of merit. There is 
merit from giving, from taming oneself, from restraining oneself, 
from truth-speaking, there is the perpetuating of merit.’ What do 
you think about this, householders ? Do not these recluses and 
brahmans speak in direct opposition to one another ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Hereupon, householders, of those recluses and brahmans who 
speak thus and hold these views : ‘From doing, from making (another) 
do , . . there is not the perpetuating of merit,’ this is to be expected 
for them: Having laid aside these three good things: right conduct 
of body, right conduct of speech, right conduct of thought, and 
taking up these three bad things: wrong conduct of body, wrong 
conduct of speech, wrong conduct of thought, they practise them. 
What is the reason for this ? It is that these worthy recluses and 
brahmans do not see the peril in wrong things, the vanity, the 
defilement, nor the advantage, allied to purity, of renouncing them 
for the good things. And because there is indeed effective action, 1 
the view of anyone that there is not effective action is a false viewr of 
his. As there is indeed effective action, if anyone has the conception 
that there is not effective action it is a false conception of his. As 
there is indeed effective action, if anyone utters the speech: ‘ There 
is not effective action,’ it is a false speech of his. As there is indeed 
effective action, if anyone says there is not effective action he is 
making a mock of those perfected ones who profess effective action. 2 
As there is indeed effective action, if he convinces others that there 

1 Jciriya , doing, fulfilment, so a complete act, t.e. act and its effect(s). 

* kiriyavada . 



I. 405-406 


On the Sure 


75 


is not effective action, that convincing of his is against true dhamma , 
and because of that convincing which is against true dhamma , he is 
exalting himself and disparaging others. Indeed, before his good 
morality is got rid of, bad morality is set up. [406] And this false 
view, false conception, false speech, the mocking of the ariyans, the 
convincing which is against true dhamma , the exalting of oneself, the 
disparaging of others — these are a variety of evil, wrong states that 
arise because of false view. 

Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus : ‘ If 
there is not effective action, this worthy individual at the breaking 
up of the body will make himself safe; but if there is effective 
action, this worthy individual at the breaking up of the body after 
dying will arise in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the downfall, 
Niraya Hell. But if it be granted that there is not effective action, 
if this is a true speech of these worthy recluses and brahmans, then 
the worthy individual is condemned here and now by intelligent 
persons who say: “ Of bad moral habit is the individual, of false 
view, he professes ineffective action.” 1 But if there is indeed effec- 
tive action, there is thus defeat in two ways for this worthy in- 
dividual: inasmuch as he is condemned here and now by intelligent 
persons, and inasmuch as at the breaking up of the body after dying 
he will uprise in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the downfall, Niraya 
Hell. This sure dhamma has thus been undertaken imperfectly by 
him, he has applied himself one-sidedly, he is neglecting the skilled 
stance. 

Hereupon, householders, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and hold these views: ‘ From doing, from making (another) do 
. . . there is the perpetuation of merit/ this is to be expected for them : 
Having laid aside these three bad things: wrong conduct of body, 
wrong conduct of speech, wrong conduct of thought, and taking up 
these three good things: right conduct of body, right conduct of 
speech, right conduct of thought, they practise them. What is the 
reason for this ? It is that these worthy recluses and brahmans see 
the peril in wrong things, the Yanity, the defilement, and the advan- 
tage, allied to purity, of renouncing them for states that are good. 
And because there is indeed effective action, the view of anyone that 

1 akiriyavada. Cf. D. i. 53, akiriyarh vyakasi , and A. i. 286 where the 
view n'atthi kammarh n'atthi kiriyam n'atthi viriyarh is ascribed to Makkh&li 
Gosala. See also E. J. Thomas, Hist. Bud. Thought, p. 72. A. K. Coomara- 
Bwarny, Some Pali Words , H.J.A.S. , vol. 4, No. 2, p. 119 appears to confuse 
akiriya with akaraniya. 



76 60. ApamiaJcasutta I. 406-407 

there is effective action is a right view of his. And as there is indeed 
effective action, if anyone has the conception that there is effective 
action, it is a right conception of his. And as there is indeed effective 
action, if anyone utters the speech : * There is effective action/ it is 
a right speech of his. And as there is indeed effective action, if 
anyone says that there is effective action, he is not making a mock of 
those perfected ones who hold the theory of effective action. As 
there is indeed effective action, if he convinces others that there is 
effective action, that convincing of his is according to true dhamma , 
[407] and because of this convincing which is in accordance with true 
dhamma , he is not exalting himself, he is not disparaging others. 
Indeed before his bad morality is got rid of, good morality is set up. 
And this right view, right conception, right speech, the non-mocking 
of the ariyans, the convincing which is in accordance with true 
dhamma , the non-exalting of self, the non-disparagement of others 
— these are a variety of good states which arise because of right view. 

Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus: ‘If 
there is effective action, this worthy individual at the breaking up 
of the body after dying will arise in a good bourn, a heaven world. 
But if it be granted that there is not effective action, if this is a true 
speech of these worthy recluses and brahmans, then this worthy 
individual is praised here and now by intelligent persons who say: 

‘ Of good moral habit is the individual, of right view, he professes 
effective action. If there is indeed effective action, thus is there 
victory in two ways for this worthy individual: inasmuch as he is 
praised here and now by intelligent persons, and inasmuch as at the 
breaking up of the body after dying he will uprise in a good bourn, in 
a heaven world. Thus this sure dhamma has been undertaken 
perfectly by him, he has applied himself two-sidedly, he is neglecting 
the unskilled stance. 

There are, householders, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of these views : l ‘ There is no cause, no reason for the 
defilement of creatures, creatures are defiled without cause, without 
reason. There is no cause, no reason for the purification of creatures, 
creatures are purified without cause, without reason. There is not 
strength, there is not energy, there is not human vigour, there is not 
human effort; all creatures, 2 all breathing things, all beings, all 

1 Also given at $, iii, 210. At D. i. 53 they are ascribed to Makkhali 
Gosaia. 

* MA. iii. 120=D.4. i. 161 says creatures, saita , are camels, oxen, donkeys, 
etc.; “breathers,” pana, are those who have one or two faculties; beings, 



I. 407-408 


On the Sure 


77 


living things are without power, without strength, without energy, 
bent 1 by fate, 2 chance, 3 and nature 4 , they experience pleasure and 
pain 5 amid the six classes 6 / But, householders, there are some 
recluses and brahmans who speak in direct opposition to these 
recluses and brahmans, and who say this : ‘ There is cause, there is 
reason for the defilement of creatures, creatures are defiled with 
cause, with reason. There is cause, there is reason for the purific- 
ation of creatures, creatures are purified with cause, with reason. 
There is strength, there is energy, there is human vigour, there is 
human effort; all creatures, all breathing things, all beings, all living 
things are not (so) without power, without strength, without energy 
that they are bent by fate, chance and nature, that they experience 
pleasure and pain amid the six classes. What do you think about 
this, householders ? [408] Do not these recluses and brahmans 

speak in direct opposition to one another ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Hereupon, householders, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of these views: ‘ There is no cause, there is no reason 
. . . amid the six classes/ this is to be expected for them: Having laid 
aside the three good things : right conduct of body, right conduct of 
speech, right conduct of thought, and taking up these three bad 
things: wrong conduct of body, wrong conduct of speech, wrong 
conduct of thought, they practise them. What is the reason for this ? 
It is that these worthy recluses and brahmans do not see the peril in 
wrong things, the vanity, the defilement, nor the advantage, allied 
to purity, in renouncing them for the good things. And because 
there is indeed cause, the view of anyone that there is not cause is a 


1 parinata, also meaning changed, ripened, matured. 

1 niyaii , a word, as used by Makkhali Gosala, implying determination, 
necessity. See B. M. Barua, Pre- Buddhistic Indian Philosophy , p. 310; and 
A. L. Basham, History and Doctrines of the Ajivikas, p. 224. 

• sangati, meeting together, here of events over which the being has no 
power or control, see B. M. Barua, op . cit. f p. 311; Basham, op. cit. 9 p. 225. 

4 bhava=sabhava , MA. iii. 120, character, nature, disposition. See Barua, 
op. cit. t p. 311; Basham, op. cit. t p. 2 26. 

• See comment at Sutrakrtdnga 9 I. i. 2. 4. 

• Of beings. The divisions to which Gosala’s expression has reference are 
of colours: black, blue (or green), red, yellow, white, and intensely white. 
Typical members of the classes are given at MA. iii. 121. Cf. D. iii. 250; 
A. iii. 383; O.S. iii. 273, and see B. M. Barua, op. cit. p. 309. 

bhutdf are those enclosed in eggs or membraneous sheaths; living things, jlvd, 
are rice, wheat, etc. See Dial. i. 71, n. 2. 


78 


I. 408-409 


60, Apannakasutia 

false view of his. As there is indeed cause, if anyone has the con- 
ception that there is not cause it is a false conception of his. As 
there is indeed cause, if anyone utters the speech: ‘There is not 
cause,’ it is a false speech of his. As there is indeed cause, if anyone 
says there is not cause, he makes mock of those perfected ones who 
profess that there is cause. As there is indeed cause, if he convinces 
others that there is not cause, this convincing of his is against true 
dhamma , and because of this convincing which is against true 
dhamma , he is exalting himself and disparaging others. Indeed, 
before his good morality is got rid of, bad morality is set up. And 
this false view, false conception, false speech, the mocking of the 
ariyans, the convincing which is against true dhamma , the exalting 
of oneself, the disparaging of others — these are a variety of evil, 
wrong states that arise thus because of false view. 

Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus: ‘ If 
there is not cause, this worthy individual at the breaking up of 
the body will make himself safe; but if there is cause, this worthy 
individual at the breaking up of the body after dying will arise in 
a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the downfall, Niraya Hell. But if it 
be granted that there is not cause, if this is a true speech of these 
recluses and brahmans, then this worthy individual is condemned 
here and now by intelligent persons who say: “ Of bad moral habit 
is the individual, of false view, he professes that there is not cause.” 
But if there is indeed cause, thus there is defeat in two ways for this 
worthy individual : [ 409 ] inasmuch as he is condemned here and now 
by intelligent persons, and inasmuch as on the breaking up of the 
body after dying he will arise in a sorrowful way, a bad bourn, the 
downfall, Niraya Hell. This sure dhamma lias thus been imper- 
fectly undertaken by him, he has applied himself one-sidedly, he is 
neglecting the skilled stance. 

Hereupon, householders, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of these views: ‘ There is cause, there is reason . . . amid 
the six classes,’ this is to be expected for them: Having laid aside 
these three bad things : wrong conduct of body, wrong conduct of 
speech, wrong conduct of thought, and taking up these three good 
things: right conduct of body, right conduct of speech, right conduct 
of thought, they practise them. What is the reason for this ? It 
is that these worthy recluses and brahmans see the peril in wrong 
things, the vanity, the defilement, the advantage, allied to purity, 
of renouncing them for good states. And because there is indeed 
cause, the view of anyone that there is cause is a right view of his. 



I. 409-410 


On the Sure 


79 


As there is indeed cause, if anyone has the conception that there is 
cause it is a right conception of his. As there is indeed cause, if 
anyone utters the speech: 4 There is cause/ it is a right speech of his. 
As there is indeed cause, if anyone says that there is cause, he does 
not make mock of those perfected ones who hold the theory of cause. 
As there is indeed cause, if he convinces others that there is cause, 
this convincing of his is in accordance with true dhamma , and because 
of this convincing which is in accordance with true dhamma , he does 
not exalt himself, does not disparage others. Indeed, before his bad 
morality is got rid of, good morality is set up. And this right view, 
right conception, right speech, the non-mocking of the ariyans, the 
convincing which is in accordance with true dhamma , the non- 
exalting of self, the non-disparaging of others — these are a variety 
of good states that arise because of right view. 

Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus : 4 If there 
is indeed cause, this worthy individual at the breaking up of the body 
after dying will arise in a good bourn, a heaven world. But if it be 
granted that there is not cause, if this is a true speech of these worthy 
recluses and brahmans, then this worthy individual is praised here 
and now by intelligent persons who say: 4 Of good moral habit is the 
individual, of right view, he professes that there is cause.’ If there 
is indeed [410] cause, thus is there victory in two ways for this worthy 
individual: inasmuch as he is praised here and now by intelligent 
persons, and inasmuch as on the breaking up of the body after dying 
he will arise in a good bourn, a heaven world. Thus this sure dhamma 
has been undertaken perfectly by him, he has applied himself two- 
sidedly, he is neglecting the unskilled stance. 

There are, householders, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view: 4 There is not formlessness throughout.’ 1 
But, householders, there are some recluses and brahmans who are in 
direct opposition to these recluses and brahmans, and who say this : 

4 There is formlessness throughout.’ What do you think about this, 
householders ? Do not these recluses and brahmans speak in direct 
opposition to one another ? ,J 

44 Yes, revered sir.” 

44 Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus: 

4 Those worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this 
view: 44 There is not formlessness throughout ” — this is not seen by 


1 n' alt hi sabbaso aruppd ti. MA> iii. 122 says there is not a Brahnm-world 
that is formless throughout (or in every way). 



80 60. Ajpaiwalcasutta I. 410-411 

me. And those worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and 
are of this view: “ There is formlessness throughout ” — this is not 
known by me. And if I, not knowing, not seeing, were to take up 
one side and define it, saying: “ This is the truth, all else is false- 
hood, n this would not be suitable in me. If this is a true saying of 
these worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this 
view: “ There is not formlessness throughout,” then this situation 
occurs that surely my uprising will be there where are those devas 
that have form and are made by mind. 1 But if this is a true saying 
of those worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of 
this view: “ There is formlessness throughout,” then this situation 
occurs that surely my uprising will be there where are those devas 
that are formless, made from perceiving. 2 Concerning what has 
form, taking up the stick is to be seen, and taking up the sword, 
quarrel, dispute, contention, strife, slander, lying speech. 3 But 
there is not this in what is formless throughout/ So, by reflecting 
thus, he is one faring along precisely for the disregard of material 
shapes, for detachment (concerning them) and for their stopping. 

There are, householders, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view; ‘ There is not the stopping of becomings 4 
throughout.’ But, householders, there are some recluses and 
brahmans who speak in direct opposition to those recluses and 
brahmans and who say this : * There is [411] the stopping of becomings 
throughout/ What do you think about this, householders ? Do 
not these recluses and brahmans speak in direct opposition to one 
another V* 

“ Yes, revered sir/’ 

“ Hereupon, householders, an intelligent man reflects thus: 
1 Those worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of 
this view: “ There is not the stopping of becomings throughout ” — 
this is not seen by me. But those worthy recluses and brahmans 
who speak thus and are of this view: “ There is the stopping of 

1 manomaya. M A. iii. 122 explains by jhdnacittamayd , made by thought 
in meditation. 

2 sanndmayd. MA . iii. 122 says arupajjhdnasaiiiidya sanndmayd , made by 
perception in the perception in the meditation on formlessness. 

* Sequence as at M, i. 110. 

* MA . iii. 123 says that bhavanirodha (the stopping of becoming or be- 
comings) is nibbSna, as does S. ii. 117, A. v. 9. I take bham, in bhamnirodha , 
as a plural to fit the plural bhavdnam at the end of this clause, see p. 81 below. 
Reference is no doubt intended to the three becomings, kdmabhava, rupa- 
and arupabhava . 



I. 411-412 


On the Sure 


81 


becomings throughout ” — this is not known by me. And if I, not 
knowing, not seeing, were to take up one side and define it, saying: 
“ This is the truth, all else is falsehood” — this would not be suitable 
in me. If this is a true saying of those worthy recluses and brahmans 
who speak thus and are of this view: “ There is not the stopping of 
becomings throughout,” then this situation occurs that surely my 
uprising will be there where are those devas who are formless, made 
from perceiving. But if this is a true saying of those worthy 
recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this view: “ There 
is the stopping of becomings throughout,” then this situation occurs: 
that I will attain nibbana here-now. If this is a true saying of those 
worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this view : 
“ There is not the stopping of becomings throughout,” this view of 
theirs is close to attachment, close to the fetters, close to delight, 
close to cleaving, close to grasping. But if this is a true saying of 
those worthy recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this 
view: “ There is the stopping of becomings throughout,” this view of 
theirs is close to detachment, close to the absence of the fetters, close 
to the absence of delight, close to the absence of cleaving, close to the 
absence of grasping. 51 Through reflecting thus he is one faring along 
precisely for the disregard of becomings, for detachment (concerning 
them), and for their stopping. 

Householders, there are these four kinds of persons existing in the 
world. i 2 What four ? Here, householders, some person is a tor- 
mentor of self, intent on the practice of self-torment. Here, house- 
holders, some person is a tormentor of others, intent on the practice 
of tormenting others. Here, householders, some person is both a 
self-tormentor, intent on the practice of tormenting self, and a 
tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting others. 
Here, householders, some person is neither a self-tormentor intent 
on the practice of self-torment, nor a tormentor of others intent 
on the practice of tormenting others. He, [412] neither a self- 
tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, quenched, 

i C/. if. i. 498. 

* As in the Kandaraka Suita, if. Sfca. No. 51. MA, iii, 124 says that the 
five types of persons who hold the views: There is not, there is no efficient 
action, theie is no cause, there is not formlessness, there is not stopping — 
become as it were three persons here; and the five who hold the opj>osite 
views of There is, etc., become as it were one person, namely the fourth kind. 
It must therefore be supposed that Bu. thought of the first group as comprising 
tormentors of self, of others and of both. The second “ group ” held the 
right views and are non-torraentors. 



82 60. Apannakasutta I. 412-413 

become cool, an experiencer of bliss that lives with self Brahma- 
become. 

And which, householders, is the self-tormentor, intent on the 
practice of self-torment % In this case, householders, some person 
comes to be unclothed, flouting life’s decencies, licking his hands 
(after meals) . . . (as in the Kandarakasutta 1 ) . . . Thus in many a way 
does he live intent on the practice of mortifying and tormenting his 
body, Householders, this person is called a self-tormentor, intent 
on the practice of self-torment. 

And which, householders, is the tormentor of others, intent on the 
practice of tormenting others ? In this case, householders, some 
person is a cattle-butcher, 2 or pig-killer, fowler ... or one of those 
others who follow a bloody calling. This is the person, householders, 
who is called a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormen- 
ting others. 

And which, householders, is the person who is a self-tormentor, 
intent on the practice of self-torment, and also a tormentor of others, 
intent on the practice of tormenting others ? In this case, house- 
holders, some person is a noble anointed king or a very rich brahman 
• . . 3 . . . Those who are called his slaves or messengers or work- 
people, they, scared of danger, with tearful faces and crying, set 
about their preparations. This, householders, is called the person 
who is a self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self-torment and 
also a tormentor of others, intent on the practice of tormenting 
others. 

And which, householders, is the person who is neither a self- 
tormentor intent on the practice of self-torment, nor a tormentor 
of others intent on the practice of tormenting others, and who, 
neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now 
allayed, quenched, become cool, an experiencer of bliss that lives 
with self Brahma-become ? In this case, householders, a Tathagata 
arises in the world 4 . . . [ 413 ] . . . Destroyed is birth, brought to a close 
the Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of 
being such or so. This, householders, is called the person who is 
neither a self-tormentor, not intent on the practice of tormenting 
self, nor a tormentor of others, not intent on the practice of tormen- 
ting others, and who, neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of 
others, is here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, an experiencer 
of bliss that lives with self Brahma-become.’ * 


i M. i. 342. 

^ M. i. 343-344. 


• M. i. 343. 

* M . i. 344-349. 



I. 413 


On the Sure 


83 


When this had been said, the brahman householders of Sala spoke 
thus to the Lord: “ Excellent, good Gotama; good Gotama, it is 
excellent. It is as if, good Gotama, one might set upright what had 
been upset . . . even so in many a figure has dhamma been made clear 
by the good Gotama. We are going to the revered Gotama for 
refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the good 
Gotama accept us as lay-disciples going for refuge from this day 
forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse on the Sure : 

The Tenth 

Division on Householders: 

The First 




II. THE DIVISION ON MONKS 

(Bhikkhuvagga) 




61 . DISCOURSE ON AN EXHORTATION TO 
RAHULA AT AMBALATTHIKA 

(Ambalatthika-Rahulovadasutta) 1 

[414] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels' feeding place. At 
that time the venerable Rahula 2 was staying at Ambalat^hika. 
Then the Lord, emerging from solitary meditation towards evening, 
approached Ambala^thika and the venerable Rahula. Then the 
venerable Rahula saw the Lord coming in the distance ; seeing him, 
he made ready a seat and water for (washing) the feet. The Lord 
sat down on the seat made ready; as he was sitting down he bathed 
his feet. And the venerable Rahula, having greeted the Lord, sat 
down at a respectful distance. 

Then the Lord, having put a little quantity of water that was left 
over into a water- vessel, addressed the venerable Rahula, saying: 
“ Do you, Rahula, see this little quantity of water that is left over 
and that is put into the water- vessel ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, Rahula, little is the recluseship of those who have no 
shame at intentional lying.” Then the Lord, having thrown away 
that little quantity of water, addressed the venerable Rahula, saying: 
“ Do you, Rahula, see this little quantity of water that has been 
thrown away ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, Rahula, thrown away is the recluseship of those who 
have no shame at intentional lying.” Then the Lord, having 
overturned that water-vessel, addressed the venerable Rahula, 


1 This Discourse is mentioned in the Bhftbru Bock Edict of Asoka as among 
those that all monks, nuns, men and women lay followers should hear often 
and reflect upon. 

2 See DPPN, t s.v. Ambalatthikarahulovadasutta. MA, iii. 126 and A A, 
i. 258 say that at this time Rahula had been a sarmnera for seven years. At 
A. i. 24 he is called chief of those anxious for training. His verses are at 
Tkag. 295-298. 


87 



88 61. Ambalatthikd-Rdhulovddasutta I. 414-415 

saying: “Do you, Rahula, see this water- vessel that has been over- 
turned V 9 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, Rahula, overturned is the reeluseship of those who have 
no shame at intentional lying.” Then the Lord, having turned 
upright that water- vessel, addressed the venerable Rahula, saying: 
“ Do you, Rahula, see this water- vessel that is empty, void ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, Rahula, void and empty is the reeluseship of those who 
have no shame at intentional lying. Rahula, it is like 1 a king’s 
bull-elephant whose tusks are as long as a plough-pole, 2 massive, 3 
finely bred, 4 whose home is the battle-field, 5 and who, when going 
forth to battle, uses 6 his forelegs, uses his hindlegs, uses the forepart 
of his body, uses the hindpart of his body, uses his head, uses his 
ears, uses his tusks and uses his tail, [415] protecting only his trunk. 7 
Thereupon it occurs to the mahout: ‘ This king’s bull-elephant whose 
tusks are as long as a plough-pole . . . protects only his trunk. This 
king’s bull-elephant has not thrown away his life.’ 8 But when, 
Rahula, the king’s bull-elephant whose tusks are as long as a plough- 
pole . . . uses his forelegs . . . uses his tail and uses his trunk, it 
thereupon occurs to the mahout: ‘ This king’s bull-elephant . . . uses 
his tail and uses his trunk. This king’s bull-elephant has thrown 
away his life, there is nothing to be done now for the king’s bull- 
elephant.’ Even so, Rahula, of anyone for whom there is no shame 
at intentional lying, of him I say that there is no evil he cannot do. 
Wherefore, for you, Rahula, ‘ I will not speak a lie, even for fun ’ 9 — 
this is how you must train yourself, Rahula. 

“ What do you think about this, Rahula ? What is the purpose 
of a mirror ?” 

“ Its purpose is reflection, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, Rahula, a deed is to be done with the body (only) after 


1 As at M . i. 460. * As at Vin. i. 363. 

* Explained at MA. iii. 127 as abhiveufahito arohasampanno . 

4 abhijdta as at A. iii. 168, also of a king’s elephant. 

4 A . iii. 168. 6 kammarh karoti , with the instrumental case. 

7 He puts it in his mouth, MA . iii. 128. 

8 Literally, the life of the king’s bull-elephant has not been thrown away 

(or, abandoned, given up, apariccaltarh). 

8 MA. iii. 126 says he (the Buddha) thought that young boys say things 
both proper and improper, and are called piyamusdvdda (fond of lying) for 
they say they saw something when they did not, or did not see it when they 
did. 




I. 415-416 On an Exhortation to Rdhula at Ambalatthika 89 

repeated reflection; a deed is to be done with speech . . , with the 
mind (only) after repeated reflection. 

If you, Rahula, are desirous of doing a deed with the body, you 
should reflect on that deed of your body, thus : * That deed which I 
am desirous of doing with the body is a deed of my body that might 
conduce to the harm of self and that might conduce to the harm of 
others and that might conduce to the harm of both ; this deed of 
body is unskilled, its yield is anguish, its result is anguish.* If you, 
Rahula, reflecting thus, should find, 4 That deed which I am desirous 
of doing with the body is a deed of my body that would conduce to the 
harm of self and to the harm of others and to the harm of both ; this 
deed of body is unskilled, its yield is anguish, its result is anguish * 
— a deed of body like this, Rahula, is certainly 1 not to be done by 
you. [416] But if you, Rahula, while reflecting thus, should find, 
4 That deed which I am desirous of doing with the body is a deed of 
my body that would conduce neither to the harm of self nor to the 
harm of others nor to the harm of both; this deed of body is skilled, 
its yield is happy, its result is happy * — a deed of body like this, 
Rahula, may be done by you. 

While you, Rahula, are doing this deed with the body, you should 
reflect thus on this self-same deed of body, 4 Is this deed that I am 
doing with the body a deed of my body that is conducing to the 
harm of self and to the harm of others and to the harm of both ? Is 
this deed of body unskilled, its yield anguish, its result anguish V If 
you, Rahula, while reflecting thus should find, 1 This deed that I am 
doing with the body is a deed of my body that is conducing to the 
harm of self . . . others . . . both ; this deed of body is unskilled, its 
yield is anguish, its result is anguish * — you, Rahula, should avoid a 
deed of body like this. But if you, Rahula, while reflecting thus, 
should find, 4 This deed that I am doing with the body is a deed of 
my body that is not conducing to the harm of self ... of others ... of 
both ; this deed of body is skilled, its yield is happy, its result happy * 
— you, Rahula, could repeat 2 a deed of body like this. 

And when you, Rahula, have done a deed with the body you 
should reflect on this self-same deed of body thus: 4 Was this deed 
that I did with the body a deed of my body that conduced to the 
harm of self and to the harm of others and to the harm of both ? 

1 sasakkam , as at M . i. 614. M A. iii, 128 explains by ekamserui = surely, 
definitely, certainly. 

2 anupadajjeyydsi, MA . iii. 128 gives upalhambheyydsi punappunam 
kareyydsi . 



90 61, Ambalatthikd-Rdhulovddasutta I. 416-420 

Was this an unskilled deed of body, its yield anguish, its result 
anguish V If you, Rahula, while reflecting thus, should find, ‘ This 
deed that I did with the body was a deed of my body that conduced 
to the harm of self . . . others , . , both; this deed of body was un- 
skilled, its yield anguish, its result anguish ’ — such a deed of your 
body, Rahula, should be confessed, disclosed, declared to the 
Teacher or to intelligent Brahma-farers so that, confessed, disclosed 
and declared, it would induce restraint in the future, [417] But 
if you, Rahula, while reflecting thus, should find, 1 This deed that 
I did with the body was a deed of my body that conduced neither to 
the harm of self nor of others nor of both; it was a skilled deed of 
body, its yield happy, its result happy 5 — because of it you, Rahula, 
may abide in zest and rapture training yourself day and night in 
states that are skilled. 

If you, Rahula, are desirous of doing a deed with speech . . . with 
mind . . . (repeat the paragraphs concerned with a deed with the body 
bat reading deed with speech and then deed with the mind) . . . [418] 

. . . [419] . . . training yourself day and night in states that are skilled. 

[ 420 ] All those recluses and brahmans, Rahula, who in the long 
past purified a deed of body, purified a deed of speech, purified a 
deed of mind, did so (only) after repeated reflection. And all those 
recluses and brahmans, Rahula, who in the distant future will purify 
a deed of body, will purify a deed of speech, will purify a deed of 
mind, will do so (only) after repeated reflection. And all those 
recluses and brahmans, Rahula, who in the present are purifying a 
deed of body, are purifying a deed of speech, are purifying a deed of 
mind, are doing so (only) after repeated reflection. Wherefore, 
Rahula, thinking: * We will purify a deed of body after repeated 
reflection, we will purify a deed of speech after repeated reflection, 
we will purify a deed of mind after repeated reflection * — this is how 
you must train yourself, Rahula.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Rahula rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on an Exhortation to Rahula at Ambalatthika: 

The First 



62 . GREATER DISCOURSE ON AN EXHORTATION 

TO RAHULA 

(Maha-Rahulovadasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near SavatthI 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s monastery. Then the Lord, 
having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, entered 
SavatthI for almsfood. The venerable Rahula, [421] having also 
dressed in the morning, taking his bowl and robe followed close after 
the Lord. Then the Lord, having looked round, addressed the 
venerable Rahula, saying: 

“ Whatever, Rahula, is material shape, past, future, present, 
subjective or objective, gross or subtle, low or excellent, distant or 
near, all material shape should be seen as it really is by means of 
perfect intuitive wisdom thus: 1 This is not mine, this am I not, this 
is not my self/ ” 

“ Only material shape, Lord, only material shape, Well- 
farer V 9 

“ Material shape, Rahula, and feeling, Rahula, and perception, 
Rahula, and the habitual tendencies, Rahula, and consciousness, 
Rahula.” 

Then the venerable Rahula thought: “ Who indeed today, when 
he has been exhorted with an exhortation face to face with the Lord, 
could enter a village for almsfood? 99 And turning back from there, 
he sat down cross-legged at the root of a tree, holding his back erect 
and arousing mindfulness in front of him. Then the venerable 
Sariputta saw the venerable Rahula sitting down cross-legged at the 
root of the tree, holding his hack erect and arousing mindfulness in 
front of him ; and seeing him, he addressed the venerable Rahula, 
saying: 14 Develop the (mind-) development 1 that is mindfulness on 
in-breathing and out-breathing, Rahula. Mindfulness on in- 
breathing and out-breathing, Rahula, if developed and made much 
of is of great fruit, of great advantage.” Then the venerable 


2 bhavanam bhavehu 

91 



92 


62. Maha-Rahulovadasttfia 


I. 421-422 


Rahula, emerging from solitary meditation towards evening, 
approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, 
he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down at 
a respectful distance, the venerable Rahula spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

“Revered sir, how if mindfulness on in-breathing and out- 
breathing is developed and made much of is it of great fruit, of great 
advantage ?” 

“ Whatever, 1 Rahula, is hard, solid, is internal, referable to an 
individual and derived therefrom, that is to say: the hair of the head, 
the hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, marrow 
of the bones, kidney, heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, intestines, 
mesentery, stomach, excrement, or whatever other thing is hard, 
solid, is internal, referable to an individual and derived therefrom, 
this, Rahula, is called the internal element of extension. Whatever 
is an internal element of extension and whatever is an external 
element of extension, just these are the element of extension. By 
means of perfect intuitive wisdom it should be seen of this as it really 
is, thus: This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self. [422] 
Having seen it thus as it really is by means of perfect intuitive 
wisdom, he disregards the element of extension, he cleanses his 
thought of the element of extension. 

And what, Rahula, is the liquid element ? The liquid element 
may be internal, it may be external. And what, Rahula, is the 
internal liquid element ? Whatever is liquid, fluid, is internal, 
referable to an individual and derived therefrom, that is to say: 
bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, serum, saliva, mucus, 
synovial fluid, urine or whatever other thing is liquid, fluid, is 
internal, referable to an individual and derived therefrom, this, 
Rahula, is called the internal liquid element. Whatever is an 
internal liquid element and whatever is an external liquid element, 
just these are the liquid element. By means of perfect intuitive 
wisdom it should be seen of this as it really is, thus : This is not mine, 
this am I not, this is not my self. Having seen this thus as it really 
is by means of perfect intuitive wisdom, he disregards the liquid 
element, he cleanses his thought of the liquid element. 

And what, Rahula, is the element of heat ? The heat element 
may be internal, it may be external. And what, Rahula, is the 


1 Down to the end of “ the element of motion,” c/. M . Sta. 28. For notes, 
see M.L.S. u 231 ff. Cf. A . ii. 164, and see Q.S. ii. 171, n. 1. 




93 


I. 422-423 On an Exhortation to Rdhula (Greater) 

internal heat element ? Whatever is heat, warmth, is internal, 
referable to an individual and derived therefrom, such as by what- 
ever one is vitalised, by whatever one is consumed, by whatever one 
is burnt up, and by whatever one has munched, drunk, eaten and 
tasted that is properly transformed (in digestion), or whatever other 
thing is heat, warmth, is internal, referable to an individual 
and derived therefrom, this, Rahula, is called the internal heat 
element. Whatever is an internal element of heat and whatever is 
an external element of heat, just these are the element of heat. By 
means of perfect intuitive wisdom it should be seen of this as it really 
is, thus : This is not mine, this am I not, this is not my self. Having 
seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect intuitive wisdom, he 
disregards the heat element, he cleanses his thought of the heat 
element. 

And what, Rahula, is the element of motion ? The element of 
motion may be internal, it may be external. And what, Rahula, is 
the internal element of motion ? Whatever is motion, wind, is 
internal, referable to an individual and derived therefrom, such as 
winds going upwards, winds going downwards, winds in the abdomen, 
winds in the belly, winds that shoot across the several limbs, in- 
breathing, out-breathing, or whatever other thing is motion, wind, 
is internal, referable to an individual and derived therefrom, this, 
Rahula, is called the internal element of motion. Whatever is an 
internal element of motion and whatever is an external element of 
motion, just these are the element of motion. By means of perfect 
intuitive wisdom it should be seen of this as it really is, thus : This is 
not mine, this am I not, this is not my self. Having seen this thus 
as it really is [423] by means of perfect intuitive wisdom, he disregards 
the element of motion, he cleanses his thought of the element of 
motion. 

And what, Rahula, is the element of space I 1 The element of 
space may be internal, it may be external. And what, Rahula, is 
the internal element of space ? Whatever is space, spacious, is 
internal, referable to an individual and derived therefroiii, such as 
the auditory and nasal orifices, the door of the mouth and that by 
which one swallows what is munched, drunk, eaten and tasted, and 
where this remains, and where it passes out of (the body) lower down, 
or whatever other thing is space, spacious, is internal, referable to an 

1 dkasadhatu does not occur in Sta. 28, but in Stas. 112, 115, 140 vinndiui- 
dhatu is added to the five mentioned above, as also at D. iii. 247, A. i. 170. 
See also Dha. 638. 



94 


62. Maha-Rdhulovadasutta 


I. 423-424 


individual and derived therefrom, this, Rahula, is called the internal 
element of space. Whatever is an internal element of space and 
whatever is an external element of space, just these are the element 
of space. By means of perfect intuitive wisdom it should be seen of 
this as it really is, thus: This is not mine, this am I not, this is not 
my self. Having seen this thus as it really is by means of perfect 
intuitive wisdom, he disregards the element of space, he cleanses his 
thought of the element of space. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is like the earth, 1 Rahula. 
For, from developing the (mind-) development that is like the earth, 
Rahula, agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have 
arisen, taking hold of your thought, will not persist. As, Rahula, 
people cast what is clean on to the earth and what is unclean and 
ordure and urine and spittle and pus and blood, and yet the earth is 
not troubled thereby nor worried or disgusted, even so do you, Rahula, 
develop the (mind-) development that is like the earth. For, from 
developing the (mind-) development that is like the earth, Rahula, 
agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have arisen, 
taking hold of your thought, will not persist. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is like water, Rahula. 
For, from developing the (mind-) development that is like water, 
Rahula, agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have 
arisen, taking hold of your thought, will not persist. As, Rahula, 
people wash what is clean in water and what is unclean and wash 
away ordure and urine and spittle and pus and blood, and yet the 
water is not troubled thereby nor worried or disgusted, [424] even 
so do you, Rahula, develop the (mind-) development that is like 
water. For, from developing . . . will not persist. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is like fire, 2 Rahula. For, 
from developing the (mind-) development that is like fire, Rahula, 
agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have arisen, 
taking hold of your thought, will not persist. As, Rahula, fire burns 
what is clean and what is unclean and ordure and urine and spittle 
and pus and blood, and yet the fire is not troubled thereby nor 

J Earth, water, fire, wind, akaaa are in Pali the same for the words rendered 
above respectively: extension, liquid (or cohesion), heat, motion, space. 
For a note on akdsa, see above, p. 17, n. 1. Cf . Thag. 1014 where Sariputta 
says of himself that he is like earth, water, fire in that he is neither attached 
to nor revolted by (sensory impingements); and A, iv. 394 /. where he tells 
the Lord that he abides with his mind like the first four of these elements. 

* Cf. Miln. 385. 



I. 424 On an Exhortation to Rahula (Greater) 95 

worried or disgusted, even so do you, Rahula, develop the (mind-) 
development that is like fire. For, from developing . . . will not 
persist. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is like wind, Rahula. 
For, from developing the (mind-) development that is like wind, 
Rahula, agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have 
arisen, taking hold of your thought, will not persist. As, Rahulla, 
the wind blows upon what is clean and what is unclean and upon 
ordure and urine and spittle and pus and blood, and yet the wind is 
not troubled thereby nor worried or disgusted, even so do you, 
Rahula, develop the (mind-) development that is like wind. For, 
from developing . . . will not persist. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is like air, Rahula. For, 
from developing the (mind-) development that is like air, Rahula, 
agreeable and disagreeable sensory impressions that have arisen, 
taking hold of your thought, will not persist. As, Rahula, the air 
does not repose anywhere, even so do you, Rahula, develop the 
(mind-) development that is like air. For, from developing the 
(mind-) development that is like air, Rahula, agreeable and dis- 
agreeable sensory impressions that have arisen, taking hold of your 
thought, will not persist. 1 

Develop the (mind-) development that is friendliness, 2 Rahula. 
For, from developing the (mind-) development that is friendliness, 
Rahula, that which is malevolence will be got rid of. Develop the 
(mind-) development that is compassion, Rahula. For, from 
developing the (mind-) development that is compassion, Rahula, 
that which is harming will be got rid of. Develop the (mind-) 
development that is sympathetic joy, Rahula. For, from developing 
the (mind-) development that is sympathetic joy, Rahula, that 
which is dislike 3 will be got rid of. Develop the (mind-) develop- 
ment that is equanimity, Rahula. For, from developing the (mind-) 
development that is equanimity, Rahula, that which is sensory 
reaction will be got rid of. Develop the (mind-) development that is 

1 These last two sentences are quoted at Miln> 388, 

1 For this and the following five kinds of mental development, cf. the six 
nissardniyd dhatuyo (elements from which there is escape) at D. iii. 247-250, 
a passage which shows interesting similarities as well as variations in respect 
of the six “ developments ” of the M . passage above. 

* arati , aversion, fretting. MA. iii. 140 explains arati as arati pantasena- 
sanesu c'eva adhihusaksu dhammesu at ukkartfhita (aversion from, or dislike 
of, remote lodgings as well as longing for (fretting after) highly skilled dhamma 
(items, mental states ?). 



96 


62. Maha-RdhulovadastUta 


I. 424-425 


on the foul, Rahula. For, from developing the (mind-) development 
that is on the foul, Rahula, that which is attachment will be got rid 
of. 1 Develop the (mind-) development that is perception of im- 
permanence, Rahula. [425] For, from developing the (mind-) 
development that is perception of impermanence, Rahula, that 
which is the conceit 4 I am ’ 2 will be got rid of. 

Develop the (mind-) development that is mindfulness of in- 
breathing and out-breathing, Rahula. Mindfulness of in-breathing 
and out-breathing, Rahula, is of great fruit, of great advantage. 
And how, Rahula, if mindfulness of in-breathing and out-breathing 
is developed, how, if it is made much of, is it of great fruit, of great 
advantage ? 

Ab to this, Rahula, a monk who is forest-gone 3 or gone to the root 
of a tree or gone to an empty place, sits down cross-legged, holding 
his back erect, arousing mindfulness in front of him. Mindful he 
breathes in, mindful he breathes out. Breathing in a long (breath) 
he comprehends, 4 1 am breathing in a long (breath) or breathing 
out a long (breath) he comprehends, 4 I am breathing out a long 
(breath) * ; or breathing in a short (breath) he comprehends, 4 1 am 
breathing in a short (breath) ’; or breathing out a short (breath) he 
comprehends, 4 1 am breathing out a short (breath).’ He trains 
himself thinking: 4 1 shall breathe in experiencing the whole 
body ’ ; he trains himself thinking: 4 1 shall breathe out experiencing 
the whole body.’ He trains himself thinking: 4 1 shall breathe 
in tranquillising the activity of the body’; he trains himself 
thinking, 4 1 shall breathe out tranquillising the activity of the 
body.’ 

He trains himself thinking 4 1 shall breathe in experiencing rapture’ ; 
he trains himself thinking, 4 1 shall breathe out experiencing rapture.’ 
He trains himself thinking, 4 1 shall breathe in . . . out experiencing 
happiness ... I shall breathe in . . . out experiencing the activity of 
thought . . . tranquillising the activity of thought . . . experiencing 
thought . . . rejoicing in thought . . . concentrating thought . . . freeing 
thought.’ He trains himself thinking, 4 1 shall breathe in . . . out 
beholding impermanence . . . beholding dispassion . . . beholding 
stopping . . . beholding casting away.’ 

1 Cf. A. iv. 40. 

* asmimana ; cf. M . i. 139. It is the pride due to thinking, 4 l am in material 

shapes, and so on.* 

* With the following cf. M. i. 56. All the terms, to the end of this Dis- 
course, are explained in Vism tf Ch. VIII. 




97 


I. 426-426 On an Exhortation to Rahula {Greater) 

Mindfulness of in-breathing and out-breathing if developed thus, 
Rahula, if made much of thus, is of great fruit, of great advantage. 
When, Rahula, mindfulness of in-breathing and out-breathing has 
been developed thus, [426] has been made much of thus, then those 
which are the last in-breaths and' out-breaths are also stopped only 
when they are known, not when they are unknown.” 1 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Rahula rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Greater Discourse on an Exhortation to Rahula: 

The Second 


63. LESSER DISCOURSE TO 
MALUNKYA (PUTTA) 

(Cula-Malunkyasutta) 2 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Savatth! 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapin<Jika’s monastery. Then a reasoning 
of mind arose to the venerable Maluhkyaputta 3 as he was meditating 
in solitary seclusion, thus: “ Those (speculative) views that are not 
explained, set aside and ignored by the Lord : The world is eternal, 
the world is not eternal, the world is an ending thing, the world is not 
an ending thing; the life-principle is the same as the body, the life- 
principle is one thing, the body another; the Tathagata 4 is after 
dying, the Tathagata is not after dying, the Tathagata both is and 
is not after dying, the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying— 
the Lord does not explain these to me. That the Lord does not 
explain these to me does not please me, does not satisfy me, so I, 

having approached the Lord, will question him on the matter. If 

1 Vism . 291 /. gives some explanation of the meaning of ye pi te carimaka 
assdsapassasa te pi vidita va nirujjhanti no avidita. 

* Referred to at Miln. 144. 

* Two sets of verses are ascribed to him in Thagx 399-404 (ver. 404 speaking 
of drawing out the arrow, or dart, salla t see below, p. 99), and 794-817. For 
further references see DPPN. 

4 MA. iii. 141 explains tathagata by satta, being; r/. MA* ii, 117. At 
UdA> 340 tathagata is explained by attd. 



98 


I. 426-428 


63. Cula-Mdlunkyasutta 

the Lord will explain to me either that the world is eternal or that 
the world is not eternal or that the world is an ending thing ... or 
that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying, then will I fare 
the Brahma-faring under the Lord. But if the Lord will not explain 
to me either that the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal 
... or that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying, then will 
I, disavowing the training, revert to secular life.” 

[427] Then the venerable Malunkyaputta, emerging from solitary 
meditation towards evening, approached the Lord ; having approached, 
having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the venerable Maluri- 
kyaputta spoke thus to the Lord : " Now, revered sir, as I was 
meditating in solitary seclusion, a reasoning of mind arose to me 
thus: 1 Those (speculative) views that are not explained, set aside, 
ignored by the Lord: The world is eternal ... or that the Tathagata 
neither is nor is not after dying, then will I, disavowing the training, 
revert to secular life.’ If the Lord knows that the world is eternal, 
let the Lord explain to me that the world is eternal. If the Lord 
knows that the world is not eternal, let the Lord explain to me that 
the world is not eternal. If the Lord does not know whether the 
world is eternal or whether the world is not eternal, then, not knowing, 
not seeing, this would be honest, namely to say: ‘ I do not know, 
I do not see.’ If the Lord knows that the world is an ending thing 
. . . (repeated in the case of each view as above) . . . [428] ... If the Lord 
does not know whether the Tathagata neither is nor is not after 
dying, then, not knowing, not seeing, this would be honest, namely 
to say: ‘ I do not know, I do not see/ 99 

u But did I ever speak thus to you, Malunkyaputta: ‘ Come you, 
Malunkyaputta, fare the Brahma-faring under me and I will explain 
to you either that the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal 
... or that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying V 9 
“ No, revered sir.” 

“ Or did you speak thus to me: 4 1, revered sir, will fare the 
Brahma-faring under the Lord if the Lord will explain to me either 
that the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal ... or that 
the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying *?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ So it is agreed, Malunkyaputta, that neither did I say: 1 Come 
you, Malunkyaputta, fare the Brahma-faring under me and I will 
explain to you either that the world is eternal or that the world is not 
eternal ... or that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying ’ ; 



I, 428-429 To Malunkya(puUa) (Lesser) 99 

and that neither did you say: 1 2 3 4 I, revered sir, will fare the Brahma- 
faring under the Lord if the Lord will explain to me either that the 
world is eternal . , . or that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after 
dying.* This being so, foolish man, who are you that you are 
disavowing 

Whoever, Malunkyaputta, should speak thus: 4 I will not fare the 
Brahma-faring under the Lord until the Lord explains to me whether 
the world is eternal or whether the world is not eternal ... or whether 
the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying * [429] — this man 
might pass away, Malunkyaputta, or ever this was explained to him 
by the Tathagata. Malunkyaputta, it is as if a man were pierced by 
an arrow that was thickly smeared with poison and his friends and 
relations, his kith and kin, were to procure a physician and surgeon. 2 
He might speak thus : 4 I will not draw out this arrow until I know of 
the man who pierced me whether he is a noble or brahman or 
merchant or worker.* He might speak thus: 4 1 will not draw out 
this arrow until I know the name and clan of the man who pierced 
me.* He might speak thus: * I will not draw out this arrow until 
I know of the man who pierced me whether he is tall or short or 
middling in height.* He might speak thus : * I will not draw out this 
arrow until I know of the man who pierced me whether he is black 
or deep brown or golden skinned.* He might speak thus : * I will 
not draw out this arrow until I know of the man who pierced me to 
what village or market town or town he belongs.’ He might speak 
thus: 4 1 will not draw out this arrow until I know of the bow from 
which I was pierced whether it was a spring-bow 3 or a cross-bow.* 
He might speak thus: 4 1 will not draw out this arrow until I know of 
the bow-string from which I was pierced whether it was of swallow- 
wort or of reed or sinew or hemp or a tree.* 4 He might speak thus : 
4 1 will not draw out this arrow until I know of the shaft by which 
I was pierced whether it was of reeds of this kind or that.’ 5 6 He 

1 As at i>. iii. 3. Ko santo hath paccacikhhasi might also mean : being whom 
what are you disavowing ? 

2 As at M. ii. 216, 256. 

3 This is a tentative translation of capa; cj. cajxtla, wavering, trembling, 
quivering. The word cdpdlikhind occurs at Dhp, 156. 

4 khirapannim , Eulotropis gigantea, a tree whose leaves contain milky 

sap, as the Pali name indicates. 

6 Two kinds are mentioned: yadi vd kaccham yadi vd ropimam. On the 
two kinds of kaccha mentioned at M A. iii. 142 (mountain and river) r/. SnA. 
33. Rnpimam is explained at MA. iii. 142 as: making an arrow (or, reed) 
taken from a thicket of ( sara -) reeds. 



100 


I. 429-431 


63. Cvla-Mdlunkyasutta 

might speak thus : * I will not draw out this arrow until I know of the 
shaft from which I was pierced what kind of feathers it had : whether 
those of a vulture or heron or hawk or peacock or some other bird/ 1 * 
He might speak thus : ‘ I will not draw out this arrow until I know of 
the shaft from which I was pierced with what kind of sinews it was 
encased : whether those of a cow or buffalo or deer or monkey/ 8 He 
might speak thus : * I will not draw out this arrow until I know of the 
arrow by which I was pierced whether it was an (ordinary) arrow 
or some other kind of arrow/ 3 [430] Malunkyaputta, this man 
might pass away or ever this was known to him. In the same way, 
Malunkyaputta, whoever should speak thus: c I will not fare the 
Brahma-faring under the Lord until the Lord explains to me either 
that the world is eternal or that the world is not eternal ... or that 
the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying/ this man might pass 
away, Malunkyaputta, or ever it was explained to him by the 
Tathagata. 

The living of the Brahma-faring, Malunkyaputta, could not be 
said to depend on the view that the world is eternal. Nor could the 
living of the Brahma-faring, Malunkyaputta, be said to depend on 
the view that the world is not eternal. Whether there is the view 
that the world is eternal or whether there is the view that the 
world is not eternal, there is birth, there is ageing, there is dying, 
there are grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair, the 
suppression 4 of which I lay down here and now. ( The same is 
repeated for each of the other speculative views: that the world is an 
ending thing , not an ending thing; that the life-principle and the body 
are the same and that they are different; that after dying the Tathagata is , 
is not , both is and is not , neither is nor is not) . . . [431] . . . The living 
of the Brahma-faring, Malunkyaputta, could not be said to depend 
on the view that the Tathagata both is and is not after dying. The 
living of the Brahma-faring, Malunkyaputta, could not be said to 
depend on the view that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after 
dying. Whether there is the view that the Tathagata both is and 
is not after dying, or whether, Malunkyaputta, there is the view 
that the Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying, there is birth, 

1 A specific kind of bird is mentioned, sithUahanu. 

* semkdra , meaning conjectural, PED; but MA. in. 142 gives makkcda. 

* Together with salla, a usual word for arrow or dart, the text mentions 
five other kinds : kkurappa t vehanda , naraca , vacchadanta , Jcaravlrapatta, Not 
one is commented upon at MA . Hi. 142. 

4 nighata, the destruction, overthrow, striking down. 



L 431-432 


101 


To Mdluhkya(putta) (Lesser) 

there is ageing, there is dying, there are grief, sorrow, suffering, 
lamentation and despair, the suppression of which I lay down here 
and now. 

Wherefore, Malunkyaputta, understand as not explained what has 
not been explained by me, and understand as explained what has 
been explained by me. And what, Malunkyaputta, has not been 
explained by me ? That the world is eternal has not been explained 
by me, Malunkyaputta; that the world is not eternal . . . that the 
world is an ending thing . . . that the world is not an ending thing 
. . . that the life-principle and the body are the same . . . that the 
life-principle is one thing and the body another thing . . . that after 
dying the Tathagata is ... is not . . . both is and is not . . . neither 
is nor is not has* not been explained by me, Malunkyaputta. And 
why, Malunkyaputta, has this not been explained by me ? It is 
because it is not connected with the goal, is not fundamental to the 
Brahma-faring, and does not conduce to turning away from, nor to 
dispassion, stopping, calming, super-knowledge, awakening nor to 
nibbana. Therefore it has not been explained by me, Malunkyaputta. 
And what has been explained by me, Malunkyaputta ? ‘ This is 

anguish ’ has been explained by me, Malunkyaputta. * This is the 
arising of anguish * has been explained by me. ‘ This is the stopping 
of anguish* has been explained by me. * This is the course leading to 
the stopping of anguish ’ has been explained by me. And why, 
Malunkyaputta, has this been explained by me % It is because it is 
connected with the goal, is fundamental to the Brahma-faring, and 
conduces to turning away from, to dispassion, stopping, calming, 
super-knowledge, awakening and nibbana. Therefore it has been 
explained by me. Wherefore, [432] Malunkyaputta, understand as 
not explained what has not been explained by me, and understand 
as explained what has been explained by me.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Malunkyaputta 
rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Lesser Discourse to Malunkya(putta): 

The Third 



64. GREATER DISCOURSE TO 
MALUftKYA(PUTTA) 

(Maha-Malunkyasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near SavatthI 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s monastery. Then the Lord 
addressed the monks, saying: “ Monks/’ “ Revered one,” these 
monks answered the Lord in assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

“ Do you, monks, remember that I taught you about the five 
fetters binding to the lower (shore) I” When this had been said, the 
venerable Malunkyaputta spoke thus to the Lord: “ Yes, I, revered 
sir, remember that the Lord taught that there are five fetters binding 
to the lower (shore).” 

" But do you, Malunkyaputta, remember it as it was spoken by 
me when I taught you about the five fetters binding to the lower 
(shore) 1” 

“ I, revered sir, remember that the Lord taught that false view of 
own body 1 * is a fetter binding to the lower (shore). I, revered sir, 
remember that perplexity . . . clinging to rites and customs . . , 
desire for sense-pleasures . . . malevolence is a fetter binding to the 
lower (shore). It is thus that I, revered sir, remember the five fetters 
binding to the lower (shore) as taught by the Lord.” 

“ And about whom do you, Malunkyaputta, remember that I 
thus taught the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) ? Would 
not wanderers belonging to other sects chide 8 you with the simile of 
the baby ? 3 For, Malunkyaputta, if there were not ‘ own body ’ 
for an innocent baby boy lying on his back, [488] whence could there 
arise for him the view of * own body ’? A leaning to the view of 
‘ own body ’ indeed lies latent in him. Malunkyaputta, if there 
were not ‘ things ’ 4 * for an innocent baby boy lying on his back, 


1 aakkaya. Cf , M. i. 300. 

* imind (aruniipamena uparambhena uparambhissanti (the last word so 
corrected at M, i. 574 from uparambhismti of the text, and so reading at 
M . i. 433). 

3 Cf. M . L 459. 

4 dhamma, things, phenomena; mental states, objects or contents of thought 

or consciousness. 


102 



I. 433-434 To Mdlunkya(putta) (Greater) 103 

whence could there arise for him perplexity about things ? A 
leaning to perplexity indeed lies latent in him. Malunkyaputta, if 
there were not 4 habits n for an innocent baby boy lying on his back, 
whence could there arise for him clinging to rites and customs ? 
A leaning to clinging to rites and customs indeed lies latent in him. 
Malunkyaputta, if there were not * sense-pleasures 5 for an innocent 
baby boy lying on his back, whence could there arise for him desire 
for sense-pleasures among the sense-pleasures ? A leaning to 
attachment to sense-pleasures indeed lies latent in him. Malun- 
kyaputta, if there were not 4 beings 9 for an innocent baby boy lying 
on his back, whence could there arise for him malevolence towards 
beings ? A leaning to malevolence indeed lies latent in him. Now, 
Malunkyaputta, would not wanderers belonging to other sects chide 
you with this simile of the baby ?” 

When this had been said, the venerable Ananda spoke thus 
to the Lord: 44 Lord, this is the time, Well-farer, this is the time 
that the Lord might teach (us) about the five fetters binding to 
the lower (shore). When the monks have heard the Lord they will 
remember.” 

44 Well then, Ananda, listen, attend carefully, and I will speak.” 

44 Yes, revered sir,” the venerable Ananda answered the Lord in 
assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

44 Herein, Ananda, an uninstructed ordinary person, taking no 
count of the pure ones, unskilled in the dhamma of the pure ones, 
untrained in the dhamma of the pure ones; taking no count of the 
true men, unskilled in the dhamma of the true men, untrained in the 
dhamma of the true men, lives with his mind obsessed by false view 
as to 4 own body,’ overcome by false view as to 4 own body,’ and he 
does not comprehend the escape, 2 as it really is, from the false view 
of 4 own body ’ that has arisen. That false view of his of 4 own 
body,’ resistant, not dispelled, is a fetter binding to the lower (shore). 
He lives with his mind obsessed by perplexity ... He lives with his 
mind obsessed by clinging to rites and customs ... He lives with his 
mind obsessed by attachment to sense-pleasures . . . [484] ... He 
lives with his mind obsessed by malevolence, overcome by malevo- 
lence, and he does not comprehend the escape, as it really is, from 
the malevolence that has arisen. That malevolence of his, resistant, 
not dispelled, is a fetter binding to the lower (shore). 

But, Ananda, an instructed disciple of the pure ones, taking count 


1 8 ild. 


* MA. iii. 144 says that the cseaj)e from false view is nibbSna. 



104 


I. 434-435 


64. Mahd-Malunkyasutta 

of the pure ones, skilled in the dhamma of the pure ones, trained in 
the dhamma of the pure ones; taking count of the true men, skilled 
in the dhamma of the true men, trained in dhamma of the true men, 
does not live with his mind obsessed by false view as to * own body/ 
overcome by false view as to 4 own body/ and he comprehends the 
escape, as it really is, from the false view of * own body * that has 
arisen. That false view of his of * own body * is got rid of with the 
leaning 1 towards it. He does not live with his mind obsessed by 
perplexity ... He does not live with his mind obsessed by clinging 
to rites and customs ... He does not live with his mind obsessed by 
attachment to sense-pleasures ... He does not live with his mind 
obsessed by malevolence, overcome by malevolence, and he com- 
prehends the escape as it really is from the malevolence that has 
arisen. That malevolence of his is got rid of with the leaning 
towards it. 

Whatever, Ananda, is the way, whatever the course for getting rid 
of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) — that one could know 
or see or get rid of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) 
irrespective of that way, that course — this situation does not occur. 
Just as this situation does not occur, Ananda, that without having 
cut off the bark of a great, stable and pithy tree, without having cut 
out the softwood, there can be no cutting out of the pith/ even so, 
Ananda, whatever is the way, whatever the course for getting rid of 
the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) — that one could know or 
see or get rid of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) irres- 
pective of this way, this course — this situation does not occur. 

But, Ananda, whatever is the way, whatever the course for getting 
rid of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore) [ 435 ] — that one 
could know or see or get rid of the five fetters binding to the lower 
(shore) because of that way, that course — this situation occurs. Just 
as this situation occurs, Ananda, that having cut off the bark of a 
great, stable and pithy tree, having cut out the softwood, there can 
be a cutting out of the pith, even so, Ananda, whatever is the way, 
whatever the course for getting rid of the five fetters binding to the 
lower (shore) — that one could know or see or get rid of the five fetters 
binding to the lower (shore) because of this way, this course — this 
situation occurs. It is as if, Ananda, the river Ganges were full of 

1 sanusaya. MA . iii. 144 says, in effect, that the fetter and the “ leaning ” 
are the same; 

% MA, iii. 145 says cutting off the bark is like attaining, cutting out the 
softwood is like insight, cutting out the pith is like the Way. 



I. 435 To MdlunJcyd(j>utta) (Greater) 105 

water, overflowing, so that a crow could drink from it, and a feeble 
man should come along, thinking: ‘ Having cut across the stream of 
the river Ganges, using my arms, I am going safely beyond/ yet he 
would not be able, having cut across the stream of the river Ganges 
and using his arms, to go safely beyond. Even so, Ananda, whoever 
while dhamma is being taught to him for the stopping of 4 own body ’ 
does not rejoice, is not pleased and composed, he is not freed, 1 even 
as this is to be understood of that feeble man. But, Ananda, if the 
river Ganges were full of water, overflowing, so that a crow could 
drink from it, and a strong man should come along, thinking: 

‘ Having cut across the stream of the river Ganges, using my arms, 
I am going safely beyond/ he would be able, having cut across the 
stream of the river Ganges and using his arms, to go safely beyond. 
Even so, Ananda, whoever while dhamma is being taught to him for 
the stopping of 4 own body * rejoices, is pleased and composed, he is 
freed, even as this is to be understood of that strong man. 

And what, Ananda, is the way, what the course for getting rid of 
these five fetters binding to the lower (shore) ? Here, Ananda, a 
monk, by aloofness from ‘ clinging/ 2 by getting rid of unskilled 
states of mind, by allaying every bodily impropriety, aloof from 
pleasures of the senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and 
abides in the first meditation which is accompanied by initial thought 
and discursive thought, is born of aloofness and is rapturous and 
joyful. Whatever is there of material shape, feeling, perception, the 
habitual tendencies, consciousness — he beholds these things as 
impermanent, suffering, as a disease, an imposthume, a dart, a 
misfortune, an affliction, as other, as decay, empty, not-self. 3 He 


1 Cf. M. i. 180, where the na vimuccati of above reads adhimuccati, is set 
on, intent on, and which Trenckner says (M. i. 560) he should have adopted 
here. But I think na vimuccati (and vimuccati a little lower) are certainly 
right here, for to cross over is to be freed. Moreover at M. i. 186 adhimuccati 
is part of the sequence of verbs all referring to the same subject, whereas 

above na vimuccati k not. Thus the compilers were right to vary the last 
of the four verbs in these two contexts however much the first three are 
identical. 

s upadhi is the basis, attachment or bond tying one to birth and continued 
existence. 

* As at M . i. 600; A . iv. 422-423; c/. A, ii, 128, and for notes on this para- 
graph see Q,S. iv. 284, 286. It is said at MA. iii. 146 that the suffering-mark 
is sixfold, the impermanence-mark twofold (with 1 decay, 1 palokata) and the 
not-self-mark threefold; other, empty, not-self. 



I. 435-436 


106 64. Mahd-Mdlunkyasutta 

turns his mind from these things; 1 * and when he has turned his mind 
from these things [436] he focuses his mind on the deathless element, 
thinking: ‘ This is the real, 8 this the excellent, 3 that is to say the 
tranquillising of all the activities, the casting out of all clinging, the 
destruction of craving, dispassion, stopping, nibbana/ 4 If he is 
steadfast therein, he achieves destruction of the cankers; if he does 
not achieve destruction of the cankers, then through his attachment 
to dhamma , his delight in dhamma , through his utter destruction of 
the five fetters binding to the lower (shore), he is of spontaneous 
uprising, one who attains nibbana there, not liable to return from 
that world. This, Ananda, is the way, this the course for getting rid 
of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore). 

And again, Ananda, a monk, by allaying initial and discursive 
thought, with the mind subjectively tranquillised and fixed on one 
point, enters and abides in the second meditation which is devoid of 
initial and discursive thought, is bom of concentration and is 
rapturous and joyful ... the third meditation . . . enters and abides 
in the fourth meditation. Whatever is there of material shape, 
feeling, perception, the habitual tendencies, consciousness ... (as 
above) . . . not liable to return from that world. This, Ananda, is 
the way, this the course for getting rid of the five fetters binding to 
the lower (shore). 

And again, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcending perceptions 
of material shapes, by the going down of perceptions due to sensory 
impressions, by not reflecting on perceptions of variety, thinking, 
‘ Ether is unending/ enters and abides in the plane of infinite ether. 
Whatever is there of feeling, perception, the habitual tendencies, 
consciousness ... (as above) . . . not liable to return from that world. 

And again, Ananda, a monk, by wholly transcending the plane of 
infinite ether, thinking, 4 Consciousness is unending/ enters and 
abides in the plane of infinite consciousness ... by wholly trans- 
cending the plane of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘ There is no 
thing/ enters and abides in the plane of no-thing. Whatever is 
there of feeling, perception, the habitual tendencies, consciousness 
— he beholds these things as impermanent, suffering, as a disease, an 
imposthume, a dart, a misfortune, an affliction, as other, as decay, 
empty, not-self. He turns his mind from these things; and when he 

1 MA. iii. 146, from the five khandhas all of which have the threefold mark. 

* Santa ia both ‘ real ’ and ‘ peace.’ 

* As at M. ii. 235, 263; A. iv. 423, v. 8, 110, 320, 322, 354 ff. 

* Aa at M. i. 136. 



I. 436-437 


107 


To Malunkyd(putta) (Greater) 

has turned his mind from these things, he focuses his mind on the 
deathless element, thinking, * This is the real* this the excellent, that 
is to say the tranquillising of all the activities, the casting out of all 
clinging, the destruction of craving, dispassion, stopping, nibbana/ 
If he is steadfast therein, [437] he achieves destruction of the cankers ; 
if he does not achieve destruction of the cankers, then through 
his attachment to dhamma , his delight in dJiamma , through his 
utter destruction of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore), he 
is of spontaneous uprising, one who attains nibbana there, not liable 
to return from that world. This, Ananda, is the way, this the course 
for getting rid of the five fetters binding to the lower (shore).” 

“ If this, revered sir, is the way, this the course for getting rid of 
the five fetters binding to the lower (shore), then how is it that some 
monks here are those who have freedom of mind while others are 
those who have freedom through intuitive wisdom V n 

“ As to this, I, Ananda, say that there is a difference in their 
faculties.” 1 2 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Ananda rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Greater Discourse to Malunkya(putta) 

The Fourth 


05. DISCOURSE TO BHADDALI 

(Bhaddalisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Savatthi 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s monastery. While he was 

1 MA. iii, 147-8; If when a monk goes after calm, one-pointedness of mind 
is to the forefront — this monk is called freed in mind ; but if wisdom is to the 
forefront — such a monk is called freed through wisdom. When one goes 
after insight, if wisdom is to the forefront, such a monk is called freed through 
wisdom; if his one-pointedness of mind is to the forefront, he is called freed 
in mind. The two chief disciples attained arahantship with calm and insight 
to the forefront; Sariputta was freed through wisdom and MoggallSna was 
freed in mind. 

* indriya. On the various groups, see PED. The Corny, here does not 
explain. Of. M . i. 453. 



108 


65. Bhadddlisutta 


I. 437-438 


there the Lord addressed the monies, saying: “ Monks.” “ Severed 
one/' these monks answered the Lord in assent. The Lord spoke 
thus; 

“ I, monks, partake of my food at one session. 1 Partaking of my 
food at one session, I, monks, am aware of good health and of being 
without illness and of buoyancy and strength and living in comfort. 
Come, do you too, monks, partake of your food at one session. 
Partaking of your food at one session, you too, monks, will be aware 
of good health, of being without illness, of bouyancy and strength 
and living in comfort.” 

When this had been said, the venerable Bhaddali spoke thus to the 
Lord: “ I, revered sir, am not capable 2 of eating my food at one 
session; revered sir, if I ate my food at one session, I might have 
scruples, 3 I might have misgivings.” 

" Well then, you, Bhaddali, having eaten one portion there where 
you were invited, having taken another portion away, might eat 
that too; so [438] could you, Bhaddali, eating thus, keep yourself 
going.” 

“ I, revered sir, am not capable of eating in this fashion; even 
eating so, revered sir, I might have scruples, I might have mis- 
givings.” 

Then the venerable Bhaddali, while a rule of training was being 
laid down by the Lord, 4 while the Order of monks was undertaking 
the training, made known his inability. Then the venerable Bhaddali 
did not see the Lord face to face for an entire three months because 
he was one who did not carry out in full the training under the 
Teacher’s instruction. 

Now at that time a number of monks were making up robe- 
material for the Lord, and they said : “ When the Lord’s robe- 
material is settled, 5 he will set out on a three months tour.” Then 
the venerable Bhaddali approached these monks; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with these monks; having conversed in a 

1 As at M . i. 124. 

1 na uasahdmi , I am not able, or, I do not dare. 

3 kukkucca is scrupulous doubting, doubting whether one is doing right. 
Bhaddali says he wonders if he could or could not fare the Brahma-faring for 
the whole of hie life if he ato thus. He had been a crow in a former birth, 
and because crows are great eaters he had the nickname of Mahachataka, 
Great Eater, MA . iii. 148 /. 

4 According to MA, iii. 149 this was the rule forbidding eating at the 
wrong time (given at Vin. iv. 85). 

4 nipthita. See Vin . iii. 195 jjjf., and B.D. ii. 4, n. 6. 



I. 438-439 


To Bhaddali 


109 


friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
These monks spoke thus to the venerable Bhaddali as he was sitting 
down at a respectful distance : 

“ Reverend Bhaddali, this robe-material is being made up for the 
Lord. When the robe-material is settled, the Lord will set out on 
a three months tour. Please, reverend Bhaddali, pay careful 
attention to this opportunity, 1 lest later it is more difficult for you.” 

“Yes, your reverences,” and the venerable Bhaddali, having 
answered these monks in assent, approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
venerable Bhaddali spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ Revered sir, a transgression has overcome me, foolish, mis- 
guided and wrong that I was, inasmuch as I made known an inability 
when a rule of training was being laid down by the Lord and when the 
Order of monks was undertaking the training. Revered sir, may 
the Lord acknowledge the transgression as a transgression for the 
sake of restraint in the future.” 

“ Indeed, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, foolish, mis- 
guided and wrong that you were, inasmuch as while a rule of training 
was being laid down by me and while the training was being under- 
taken by the Order of monks, you made known your inability. 

At that time this was not realised by you, Bhaddali: The Lord is 
staying near SavatthI and the Lord will know of me that the monk 
named Bhaddali is not one that carries out in full the training under 
the Teacher’s instruction. 2 At that time this was not realised by 
you, Bhaddali. Nor at that time was this realised by you, Bhaddali : 
A number [439] of monks who have come to SavatthI for the rains 
will also know of me that the monk named Bhaddali is not one that 
carries out in full the training under the Teacher’s instruction. At 
that time this was not realised by you either, Bhaddali. Nor at 
that time was this realised by you, Bhaddali : A number of nuns who 
have come to SavatthI for the rains will also know of me ... a number 
of layfollowers who are living in SavatthI ... a number of women 
layfollowers who are living in SavatthI will also know of me that the 
monk named Bhaddali is not one that carries out in full the training 
under the Teacher’s instruction. At that time this was not realised 
by you either, Bhaddali. Nor at that time was this realised by you, 

1 desaka. MA. iii. 149 has the v.i. dosaka and explains by okfmt ajHU\ldha f 
occasion (permission) and fault. 

* Quoted at DA. 32, V A. i. 107, UdA. 19, As/. 57. 



110 


65, Bhadddlisutta 


I. 439 


Bhaddali: A number of recluses and brahmans belonging to other 
sects who have come to SavatthI for the rains will also know of me 
that the monk named Bhaddali, a disciple and an elder under the 
recluse Gotama, is not one that carries out in full the training under 
the Teacher’s instruction. At that time this was not realised by you 
either, Bhaddali.” 

“ Revered sir, a transgression has overcome me, foolish, mis- 
guided and wrong that I was . . . may the Lord acknowledge the 
transgression as a transgression for the sake of restraint in the future.” 

“ Indeed, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, foolish, mis- 
guided and wrong that you were, inasmuch as while a rule of training 
was being laid down by me and while the training was being under- 
taken by the Order of monks, you made known your inability. 

What do you think about this, Bhaddali ? There might be a 
monk here, freed both ways, 1 to whom I might speak thus: ‘ Come 
you, monk, be a causeway for me across the mire.* Would he 
make a causeway of himself 2 or would he twist his body in another 
(direction), or would he say No ?” 

" Not this, revered sir.” 

“What do you think about this, Bhaddali ? There might be a 
monk here, freed through intuitive wisdom ... a mental realiser 3 
. . . won to view . . . freed through faith . . . who strives after dhamma 
. . . who strives after faith, 4 and to whom I might speak thus: 4 Come 
you, monk, be a causeway for me across the mire/ Would he make 
a causeway of himself, or would he twist his body in another 
(direction), or would he say No ?” 

“ Not this, revered sir.” 

“ What do you think about this, Bhaddali ? At that time were 


1 See M. i. 477 (and below, p. 151). This and the other six terras (freed 
through intuitive wisdom down to the one who strives after faith) occur also 
at M. i. 477-479 and at A. i. 73-74, iv. 10; J D. iii. 105, 253-254; Pug. 14-15; 
and with three others at A. v. 23. 

* sanhameyya . Cf. Jd. iii. 373, atldnam mnkamarh Icalvd . 

* kayasakhhin . See M. i. 478 . Cf. A. i. 118 /. on this and the next two 
terms, and where it is said it is difficult to decide which is the most excellent. 
MA. iii. 189 =^ 4 ^ 4 . ii. 190 says the kdyasakkkin first attains jkdna and later 
realises stopping and nibbana. M . i. 47$~Pug. 14 , 73 describes him as 
“ a person who abides having attained the (eight) Deliverances kdyena 
(through mind ? while in the body ?) and some of whose cankers are destroyed 
if he has seen by means of right wisdom/ 1 He should be compared with the 
person who is freed both ways and the one freed by means of wisdom. 

4 Cf. the strivers after dhamma and after faith at M. i. 226. 



I. 439-440 


To Bhaddali 


111 


you, Bhaddali, freed both ways [ 440 ] or freed through intuitive 
wisdom or a mental realiser or one that had won to view or one freed 
through faith or one striving after dhamma or one striving after 

faith r 

“ Not this, revered sir.” 

“ At that time were not you, Bhaddali, empty, void, fallen short V n 

“ Yes, revered sir. Revered sir, a transgression overcame me, 
foolish, misguided, wrong that I was, inasmuch as I made known an 
inability while a rule of training was being laid down by the Lord 
and while the training was being undertaken by the Order of monks. 
May the Lord acknowledge the transgression as a transgression for 
the sake of restraint in the future.” 

“ Indeed, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, foolish, mis- 
guided and wrong that you were, inasmuch as while a rule of training 
was being laid down by me, and while the training was being under- 
taken by the Order of monks, you made known an inability. But 
since you, Bhaddali, see the transgression as a transgression and 
confess it according to the rule , 1 2 we acknowledge it for you. For, 
Bhaddali, in the discipline for an ariyan, this is growth : whoever, 
seeing a transgression as a transgression, confesses according to the 
rule, he comes to restraint in the future. 

Herein, Bhaddali, some monk is not one that carries out 3 in full 
the Teacher’s instruction. It occurs to him: 4 Suppose I were to 
resort to a remote lodging—to a forest, to the root of a tree, a 
mountain slope, a wild place, a hill cave, a cemetery, a woodland 
thicket, the open air, a heap of straw — I should probably realise 
conditions of further-men, the excellent knowledge and insight 
befitting the ariyans.’ So he resorts to a remote lodging— to a 
forest, to the root of a tree ... a heap of straw. As he is staying 
aloof in this way the Teacher upbraids him, and when they have 
examined him his learned fellow Brahma-farers upbraid him, and 
devatas upbraid him, and the self upbraids the self. He, upbraided 
by the Teacher, and upbraided by his learned fellow' Brahma-farers 

after they have examined him, and upbraided by dcvatm , and the 

self upbraided by the self, does not realise conditions of further-men, 
the excellent knowledge and insight befitting the ariyans. What is 

1 MA . iii. 152 says “ empty and void because of lack of inner development 

of the qualities of ariyans/’ 

* Cf. Vin . i, 315, ii. 126, 192, iv. 1849, etc. See PTC . s.v. aceaya. 

* Probably, sikkhaya, the training, should be inserted hero as it occurs 
in all the corresponding passages in this Discourse. 



112 


65. Bhaddalisutta 


I. 440-441 


the reason for this ? It is thus, Bhaddali, since he is not one that 
carries out in full the training under the Teacher’s instruction. 1 

But, Bhaddali, there is some monk here who fully carries out the 
training under the Teacher’s instruction. It occurs to him: * If I 
were to resort to a remote lodging— to a forest, to the root of a tree, 
a mountain slope, a wild place, a hill cave, a cemetery, a woodland 
thicket, the open air, [441] a heap of straw, I should probably realise 
conditions of further-men, the excellent knowledge and insight 
befitting the ariyans.’ So he resorts to a remote lodging — to a 
forest, to the root of a tree ... a heap of straw. As he is staying 
aloof in this way neither the Teacher upbraids him, nor, after they 
have examined him, do his learned fellow Brahma-farers upbraid him, 
nor do devatas upbraid him, nor does the self upbraid the self. He, 
neither upbraided by the Teacher, nor upbraided by his learned 
fellow Brahma-farers after they have examined him, nor upbraided 
by devatas , nor the self upbraided by the self, realises conditions of 
further-men, the excellent knowledge and insight befitting the ariyans. 
He, aloof from pleasures of the senses, aloof from unskilled states of 
mind, enters and abides in the first meditation which is accompanied 
by initial thought and discursive thought, is born of aloofness and 
is rapturous and joyful. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, 
Bhaddali, for one who fully carries out the training under the 
Teacher’s instruction. 

And again, Bhaddali, the monk, by allaying initial and discursive 
thought, the mind subjectively tranquillised and fixed on one point, 
enters and abides in the second meditation which is devoid of initial 
and discursive thought, is born of concentration and is rapturous and 
joyful. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, Bhaddali, for one 
who fully carries out the training under the Teacher’s instruction. 

And again, Bhaddali, the monk, by the fading out of rapture, 
dwells with equanimity, attentive and clearly conscious and he 
experiences in his person that joy of which the ariyans say: * Joyful 
lives he who has equanimity and is mindful,’ and he enters and abides 
in the third meditation. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, 
Bhaddali, for one who fully carries out the training under the 
Teacher’s instruction. 

And again, Bhaddali, the monk, by getting rid of joy, by getting 
rid of anguish, by the going down of his former pleasures and sorrows, 
enters and abides in the fourth meditation, which has neither joy 


1 CL 8. v. 378. 



I. 441-442 


To Bhaddali 


113 


nor anguish and which is entirely purified by equanimity and mind- 
fulness. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, Bhaddali, for one 
who fully carries out the training under the Teacher’s instruction. 

He, with his mind thus composed, quite purified, quite clarified 1 
. . . directs his mind to the knowledge and recollection of former 
habitations . . . Thus he recollects a variety of former habitations in 
all their modes and details. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, 
[442] Bhaddali, for one who fully carries out the training under the 
Teacher’s instruction. 

He, with his mind thus composed, quite purified . . , directs his 
mind to the knowledge of the passing hence and arising of beings 
. . . Thus with the purified dem-vision surpassing that of men does 
he see beings as they pass hence, as they arise ; he comprehends 
that beings are mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going 
according to the consequences of deeds. What is the reason for this ? 
It is thus, Bhaddali, for one who fully carries out the training under 
the Teacher’s instruction. 

He, with his mind thus composed, quite purified, quite clarified . . . 
directs his mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the cankers. 
He comprehends as it really is : This is anguish ... He comprehends 
as it really is : This is the course leading to the stopping of anguish. 
He comprehends as it really is: These are the cankers ... He com- 
prehends as it really is: This is the course leading to the stopping of 
the cankers. Knowing this thus, seeing this thus, his mind is freed 
from the canker of sense-pleasures and his mind is freed from the 
canker of becoming and his mind is freed from the canker of ignor- 
ance. In freedom the knowledge comes to be: I am freed; and he 
comprehends: Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the Brahma- 
faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of being such 
or so. What is the reason for this ? It is thus, Bhaddali, for 
one who fully carries out the training under the Teacher’s instruc- 
tion.” 

When this had been said, the venerable Bhaddali spoke thus to 
the Lord: “ What is the cause, revered sir, what the reason why they 
constantly 2 take action 3 against some monk here ? What is the 

1 For tKis passage, down to 4 there is no more of being such or bo,’ see 
above, p. 12 jf, 

* pavayha pavayha , urgent, pressing, constantly. MA. iii. 153 says: 
Having constantly reproved him for even trifling faults. Cf. M . iii. 118. 

3 kdranam karonli. This probably means the juridical action that the 

Samgha (Order) has power to employ. Similarly below, adhikaratia , “ legal 



65, Bhaddalisutta 


114 


I. 442-443 


cause, revered sir, what the reason why they do not constantly take 
similar action against some other monk here ?” 

“ As to this, Bhaddali, some monk is a constant offender, full of 
offences. 1 On being spoken to by the monks he shelves the question 
by asking another, he answers off the point, he evinces anger and 
ill-will and discontent, 2 he does not conduct himself properly, is not 
subdued, does not mend his ways, 3 and does not say: * What can I 
do to please the Order V Therefore, Bhaddali, it occurs to the 
monks: * This monk, your reverences, is a constant offender, full of 
offences. On being spoken to by the monks he shelves the question 
, . , and does not say: “ What can I do to please the Order ?” 
[448] It were good if the venerable ones were to investigate this 
monk in such a way that this legal question of his should not be 
settled quickly/ So, Bhaddali, the monks investigate this monk 
in such a way that this legal question of his is not settled quickly. 

But, Bhaddali, some monk is a constant offender, full of offences. 
He, on being spoken to by the monks does not shelve the question 
by asking another, he does not answer off the point, he does not 
evince anger and ill-will and discontent, he conducts himself properly, 
is subdued, mends his ways, and he says: * What can I do to please 
the Order V Therefore, Bhaddali, it occurs to the monks: * This 
monk, your reverences, is a constant offender . . . and he says: 
“ What can I do to please the Order V * It were good if the venerable 
ones were to investigate this monk in such a way that this legal 
question of his should be settled quickly/ So, Bhaddali, the monks 
investigate this monk in such a way that this legal question of his is 
settled quickly. 

Then, Bhaddali, some monk here is an occasional offender, he is 
not full of offences. But he, on being spoken to by the monks shelves 
the question by asking another, he answers off the point, he evinces 
anger and ill-will and discontent, he does not conduct himself 
properly, is not subdued, does not mend his ways, and he does not 
say: ‘ What can I do to please the Order V Therefore, Bhaddali, it 
occurs to the monks : * This monk, your reverences, is an occasional 
offender, he is not full of offences ... he does not say: “ What can 

1 dpattibahvla , as at Vin. i. 321, 330, 332. 

* Cf. M . i. 99, 250; Vin. iv. 135. » As at Vin. i. 49. 

question ” refers only to the four types of these that the Samgha is able to 
deal with. They are treated of in detail at Vin. ii. 88 ff. f and come under 
“ ecclesiastical ” jurisdiction only, having nothing to do with a secular court 
of justice. 




I. 443-445 


To Bhaddali 


115 


I do to please the Order V 9 It were good if the venerable ones were 
to investigate this monk in such a way that this legal question of his 
should not be settled quickly.’ So, Bhaddali, the monks investigate 
this monk in such a way that [444] this legal question of his is not 
settled quickly. 

But, Bhaddali, some monk is an occasional offender, he is not full 
of offences. He, on being spoken to by the monks does not shelve 
the question by asking another, he does not answer off the point, he 
does not evince anger and ill-will and discontent, he conducts him- 
self properly, is subdued, mends his ways, and he says: ‘ What can 
I do to please the Order V Therefore, Bhaddali, it occurs to the 
monks : ‘ This monk, your reverences, is an occasional offender, he 
is not full of offences ... he says: “ What can I do to please the 
Order ?” It were good if the venerable ones were to investigate 
this monk in such a way that this legal question of his should be 
settled quickly.’ So, Bhaddali, the monks investigate this monk in 
such a way that this legal question of his is settled quickly. 

In this connection, Bhaddali, some monk is going along with only 
a little faith, with only a little regard. 1 Therefore, Bhaddali, it 
occurs to the monks: ‘ This reverend monk is going along with only 
a little faith, only a little regard. If we constantly take action 
against this monk, be careful lest even that little faith of his, even 
that little regard, deteriorate.’ Bhaddali, it is like a man with only 
one eye 2 — his friends and acquaintances, his kith and kin would take 
care of that one eye so that that one eye of his did not deteriorate, 
thinking: * Take care lest that one eye of his deteriorates.’ Even so, 
Bhaddali, some monk goes along with only a little faith, only a little 
regard. Therefore, Bhaddali, it occurs to the monks: 4 This 
reverend monk is going along with only a little faith ... be careful 
lest even that little faith of his, even that little regard, deteriorate’. 

This, Bhaddali, is the cause, this the reason why they constantly 
take action against some monk here. But, Bhaddali, this is the 
cause, this the reason why they do not constantly take similar action 
against some (other) monk here.” 

“ What is the cause, revered sir, what the reason why there were 
formerly fewer [445] rules of training but more monks who were 
established in profound knowledge ? And what is the cause, 
revered sir, what the reason why there are now more rules of training 
but fewer monks who are established in profound knowledge ?” 


1 pema, affection or regard. 


* Lit,, “ like the eye of one man.” 



116 


65. Bhaddalisutta 


I. 445 


“ It is thus, Bhaddali: When beings are deteriorating, when true 
dhamma is vanishing away, there are more rules of training and 
fewer monks established in profound knowledge. Not until some 
conditions which cause cankers appear here in the Order 1 does the 
Teacher, Bhaddali, lay down a rule of training for disciples. 1 But 
when, Bhaddali, some conditions which cause cankers appear here 
in the Order, then the Teacher lays down a rule of training for 
disciples so as to ward off those very conditions which cause cankers. 
Not until the Order has arrived at greatness, 2 Bhaddali, do some 
conditions which cause cankers appear here in the Order. But 
when, Bhaddali, the Order has arrived at greatness, then some con- 
ditions which cause cankers appear here in the Order, and then the 
Teacher lays down a rule of training for disciples so as to ward off 
those very conditions which cause cankers. Not until the Order has 
arrived at the height of gain 3 ... at the height of fame 4 ... at much 
learning 5 ... at long standing, 6 Bhaddali, do some conditions which 

1 Cf. Vin. iii. 10. 

* makaita , a considerable size. MA. iii. 155-156 says that when the Order 
has become large, mahantabhava , then the lodgings do not suffice for the 
elders, those of middle standing and the newly ordained monks. So conditions 
causing cankers arise in regard to the lodgings. The rules of training laid 
down for an Order attained to largeness are (1) “ whatever monk should lie 
down to sleep with one who is not ordained, there is a pacittiya offence ” 
(Pac. 5. Vin. iv. 16), and (2) ** Whatever nun should ordain every year, 
there is a pacittiya. ... (3) Whatever nun should ordain two (probationers) 

in one year, there is a pacittiya offence ” (Nuns’ Pac, 72, 73, Vin. iv. 336, 337). 

3 labkagga . Vin, iii. 10 reads labhaggamakatta; see B.D. i. 19, n. 1. The 
conditions causing cankers to arise when the Order has arrived at the height 
of gains or acquisitions are controlled by Pac. 41 (Vin. iv. 92, cited at MA. iii. 
156) : “ Whatever monk should with his own hand give solid or soft food to 
an unclothed ascetic or to a male or female wanderer, there is a pacittiya 
offence.” 

4 yasagga. Not at Vin. iii. 10. For this stage in the Order’s deterioration 
the 51st Pac. (Vin. iv. 110) was laid down: “ in drinking strong drinks and 
intoxicants, there is a pacittiya offence,” cited at MA. iii. 156. Cf. labkagga - 
yasaggappatld of the Bodhisatta’s mother at Jd. i. 51, 

5 At this stage there are misunderstandings, and people explain the 
Teacher’s instruction by what is against dhamma and against vinaya. MA. 
iii. 156 cites Vin. iv. 135-139, which include the “ perverse or wrong views ” 
ascribed to the monk Arittha and the novice Kandaka (Pac. 68, 70). 

9 rattannuta. Here, as in the other cases, the reference is to the members 
of the Order rather than to the Order as a whole. So, here the meaning is 
“ when those who have gone forth for a long time know how many nights it 
is since they first went forth.” MA. iii, 157 refers to Upasena Vanganta- 
putta’s offence in ordaining his pupil when he himself was only of one year’s 



I. 445-446 


To Bhaddali 


117 


cause cankers appear here in the Order. But when, Bhaddali, the 
Order has arrived at long standing, then some conditions which 
cause cankers appear in the Order, and then the Teacher lays down 
a rule of training for disciples so as to ward off those very conditions 
which cause cankers. 

You were few at the time when I, Bhaddali, taught you the 
disquisition on dhamma — the Parable of the Thoroughbred Colt. 
Do you, Bhaddali, remember ?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ To what cause do you attribute this, Bhaddali ?” 

“ It is that I, revered sir, for a long time was not one who carried 
out in full the training under the Teacher's instruction.” 

“ This was not the only cause or reason, Bhaddali. For, for a 
long time, Bhaddali, I have known your mind with my mind (and 
I knew) : While dhamma is being taught by me this foolish man does 
not listen to dhamma with ready ear, applying himself, paying 
attention, concentrating with all his mind. 1 However, I, Bhaddali, 
will teach you the disquisition on dhamma — the Parable of the 
Thoroughbred Colt. Listen to it, attend carefully, [446] and I will 
speak.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” the venerable Bhaddali answered the Lord in 
assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

“ Bhaddali, as a skilled horse-trainer, 2 having received a beautiful 
thoroughbred, first of all makes it get used to the training in respect 
of wearing the bit ; while it is getting used to the training in respect of 
wearing the bit, whatever the contortions, capers, struggles 3 while 
it is getting used to a training it was not used to before, yet because 
of the continual training, the gradual training it is brought to per- 
fection 4 in that respect. When, Bhaddali, the beautiful thoroughbred 


1 (?/. M . i. 325. 4 C/. M . iii. 2. 

• Cf. M. i. 234 for these words where they are applied to Saccaka the Jain 
because of his inconsistent statements. 

4 parinibbdyati , or, is perfected, perfectly trained, dompted or extinguished 

in regard to its former restlessness, etc. 

standing — he had seen monks being ordained when they were less than ten years’ 
standing. So, “ One of less than ten years’ standing should not be ordained ” 
( Ft n. i. 59), and “ One should not be ordained by an ignorant, inexperienced 
(monk) ... I allow monks to be ordained by an experienced, capable (monk) 
if they are of ten years’ standing or of more than ten years’ standing” (Fin. 
i. 60). As MA. iii. 157 remarks two rules of training are laid down to cover 
the time of reaching “ long-standing,” 




118 


65. Bhadddlisutta 


I. 446 


is perfected 1 in that respect by the continual training, the gradual 
training, the horse-trainer makes it get used to a further training in 
respect of wearing the harness. While it is getting used to the 
training in respect of wearing the harness . . . because of the gradual 
training it is brought to perfection in that respect. When, Bhaddali, 
the beautiful thoroughbred is perfected in that respect by the con- 
tinual training, the gradual training, the horse-trainer makes it get 
used to a further training in respect of going straight on 2 , in respect 
of (running in) a circle, 3 in respect of its hoofs, 4 * in respect of gal- 
loping, of neighing, 8 of the “ royal trick,” 6 the “ royal acrobatic 
feat,” 7 in respect of matchless speed, of matchless swiftness, of 
matchless manners. While it is getting used to the training in 
matchless speed, matchless swiftness, matchless manners, whatever 
the contortions, capers, struggles while it is getting used to a training 
it was not used to before, yet because of the continual training, the 
gradual training it is brought to perfection in each respect. When, 
Bhaddali, the beautiful thoroughbred is perfected in each respect, 
the horse-trainer provides it further with a gloss and shine,® Bhad- 
dali, a beautiful thoroughbred, when endowed with these ten 
qualities,® becomes worthy of a king, a royal treasure, and it is 
reckoned as an attribute of royalty. Even so, Bhaddali, if a monk 
is endowed with ten qualities, he is worthy of offerings, worthy of 
hospitality, worthy of gifts, to be saluted with joined palms, an 
unsurpassed field of merit for the world. With what ten ? Herein, 
Bhaddali, a monk is endowed with an adept’s right view, he is 
endowed with an adept’s right thought, he is endowed with an adept’s 


1 parinibbuta. 

* anukkama . MA. iii. 166 appears to explain that the trainer gives the 
four feet a hit with a knife so that the horse raises them. Childers, s.v. 
anukkama , gives “ regular succession, order.” The idea seems to be that the 
horse is trained to raise all its four feet the same distance from the ground. 

* mandate, in a ring or circle. MA . iii. 168 says that if someone is sitting 
on the horse’s back he can pick up a weapon that has fallen to the ground; 
for the sake of doing this he makes the horse go in a circle. Cf. Mhvs . xxiii. 73 
where a horse was made to gallop mawfale, “ in a circle.” 

4 khurakdya . The horse is trained to go along on the tips of its hoofs so 
that no sound is heard, MA . iii. 169. 

* Important in battle. 

* rajaguna. PED . says 44 a trick of a circus horse according to MA, 
iii. 159 it is some trick of plunging into water. 

7 rajavamsa. Cf . varhsa . . , ghatikd at D, i. 6. 

* vanniya ca valiya ca. Meaning is not clear. The Corny, says nothing. 

* Three at A. i. 244; four at A . ii. 113. Cf. A. i. 284, ii. 116, 170. 



I. 446-447 


To Bkadddli 


119 


right speech, he is endowed with an adept’s right action, he is 
endowed with an adept’s right mode of livelihood, he is endowed 
with an adept’s right endeavour, [447] he is endowed with an adept’s 
right mindfulness, he is endowed with an adept’s right concentration, 
he is endowed with an adept’s right knowledge, he is endowed with 
an adept’s right freedom, Bhaddali, if a monk is endowed with 
these ten qualities, he is worthy of offerings, worthy of hospitality, 
worthy of gifts, to be saluted with joined palms, an unsurpassed field 
of merit for the world.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Bhaddali rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse to Bhaddali: 

The Fifth 


66. DISCOURSE ON THE SIMILE OF THE 
QUAIL 

(Latukikopamasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Angut- 
tarapa. Apana 1 was the name of a market town in Anguttarapa. 
Then the Lord, having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl and 
robe, entered Apana for almsfood. When he had walked for alms- 
food and was returning from the almsgathering after the meal, he 
approached a forest-thicket for the day-sojourn. When he had 
plunged into that forest-thicket, he sat down at the root of a tree for 
the day-sojourn. And the venerable Udayin also, having dressed in 
the morning, and taking his bowl and robe, entered Apana for 
almsfood. When he bad walked for almsfood and was returning 
from the almsgathering after the meal, he approached that same 
forest-thicket for the day-sojourn. When he had plunged into that 
forest-thicket, he sat down at the root of a tree for the day-sojourn. 
Then while the venerable Udayin was in private seclusion a reasoning 
arose in his mind thus : 


1 Potaliya Sulla , M, i, 359, was preached here. 



120 66 . LatukikopamasuUa I. 447-448 

“ Indeed our Lord is a remover of many painful things, indeed our 
Lord is a bringer of many pleasant things, indeed our Lord is a 
remover of many unskilled things, indeed our Lord is a bringer of 
many skilled things.” 1 Then the venerable Udayin, emerging from 
his seclusion towards evening, approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, [448] he sat down at a respect- 
ful distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
venerable Udayin spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ While I, revered sir, was in private seclusion, a reasoning arose 
in my mind thus: 4 Indeed our Lord is a remover of many painful 
things . . . indeed our Lord is a bringer of many skilled things/ We, 
revered sir, used to eat in the evening and in the morning and during 
the day — at a wTong time. 2 Revered sir, the Lord at that time 
addressed the monks, saying: ‘ Please do you, monks, give up eating 
at this wrong time, during the day/ I was depressed because of this, 
revered sir, I was sorry, and thought: ‘ The Lord speaks of our giving 
up that sumptuous food, solid and soft, which the believing house- 
holders give us during the day — at the wrong time, and the Well- 
farer speaks of our rejecting it/ Those of us, revered sir, who look 
to the Lord with regard and respect and modesty and fear of blame, 
gave up such food as this (given) during the day, at the wrong time. 
Then we, revered sir, used to eat in the evening as well as in the 
morning. It was at this time that the Lord addressed the monks, 
saying: * Please do you, monks, give up eating at this wrong time, 
during the night/ I was depressed because of this, revered sir, I 
was sorry, and thought: ‘ The Lord speaks of our giving up that 
which is reckoned as the more sumptuous of these two meals, and 
the Well-farer speaks of our rejecting it/ Once upon a time, 
revered sir, a certain man, having obtained some curry during the 
day, spoke thus: ‘ Come, let us put this aside, and in the evening we 
will enjoy it all together/ All cooking, revered sir, is at night, 
there is little during the day. But those of us, revered sir, who look 
to the Lord with regard and respect and modesty and fear of blame, 
gave up such food as this (given) at night, at the wrong time. Once 
upon a time, revered sir, when the monks were walking for almsfood 
in the dense darkness of the night, 3 they would walk into a pool at 
the entrance to a village, and they would fall into the dirty pool near 

1 Quoted at Kvu, 528. 

* See Vin, iv. 85, and B.D . ii. 335, n, Pae. 37 makes it an offence to eat 

after noon has passed until the next sunrise. See if, i. 474. 

1 raUandhakaratimisaya; cf , D. iii. 85, Pug, 30. 



I. 448-449 


121 


On the Simile of the Quail 

the village, and they would blunder into a thorny hedge, and they 
would blunder into a sleeping cow, and they would meet with young 
men, 1 both those who had committed a crime and those who had not, 
and women would solicit them 2 against true dkamma. Once upon a 
time I, revered sir, used to walk for almsfood in the dense darkness 
of the night, and a certain woman saw me during a lightning flash as 
she was washing a bowl, 3 and terrified at seeing me, she uttered a 
scream of horror: ‘ How terrible for me, indeed there is a demon 
after me.* 4 This said, I, revered sir, said to this woman: ‘ Sister, 
I am not a demon, I am a monk [ 449 ] standing for almsfood/ She 
said, * The monk’s father must be dead, the monk’s mother must be 
dead 6 — it were better for you, monk, to have your belly cut out with 
a sharp butcher’s knife than to walk for almsfood for the sake of 
your belly in the dense darkness of the night.’ When I remember 
this, revered sir, it occurs to me : * Indeed our Lord is the remover of 
many painful things, indeed our Lord is the bringer of many pleasant 
things, indeed our Lord is the remover of many unskilled things, 
indeed our Lord is the bringer of many skilled things.’ ” 

“ But even so, Udayin, some foolish persons here, on being told 
by me: ‘Give this up,’ speak thus: ‘But what of this trifling 
insignificant matter ? This recluse lays too much emphasis on 
(exertion).’ 6 But they do not give it up and they cause dissatis- 
faction to be nursed against me and against those monks who desire 
the training. This 7 becomes for them, 8 Udayin, a strong bond, a 
stout bond, a solid bond, a bond that does not rot away, a thick log of 
wood.® Udayin, as a quail, a little hen bird, 10 because she is caught 
in a trap of creepers, comes 11 to slaughter there or to captivity or 
dying; so that, Udayin, if any one should say: ‘ That quail, a little 
hen bird, because she is caught in a trap of creepers comes to slaughter 
there or to captivity, or dying, yet for her it is a bond of no strength, 


1 MA. iii. 164 explains manava, as is often the case, by com, thief. 

8 Cf. Pac. 6 ( Vin. iv. 17 Jf.). 3 Quoted at DA. 34. 

4 As at Vin. ii. 115. 

* bhikkhussa dtu mart bhikkhussa main mari. According to Trenckner 
( M. i. 667) the text “ no doubt purports to make the woman speak a sort 
of patois.” 

8 adhisallikhati; as at A. i. 236. See Q.S. i. 217, n. 1, and Neumann, 
vol. i. 22, n. MA. iii. 166 explains by atisallekhati ativaydmam karoti. 

1 This trifling matter. 8 The foolish people. 

* thula kalihgara . MA. iii. 166 saj's it is like a great piece of wood tied to 
their throats. Cf. S. ii. 268, Dhp. 41. 

10 Cf. D. i. 91. 11 agameti=upeti t MA. iii. 166. 



122 66. iMukikopamasutta 1, 449-450 

a weak bond, a bond that rots away, a pithless bond ’—would anyone 
speaking thus, Udayin, be speaking rightly V* 

“ No, revered sir. That quail, a little hen bird, revered sir, 
because she is caught in a trap of creepers, comes to slaughter 
there or to captivity, or dying, since for her it is a strong bond, a 
stout bond, a solid bond, a bond that does not rot away, a thick log 
of wood.” 

“ Even so, Udayin, some foolish persons here, on being told by me, 
4 Give this up/ speak thus: 4 But what of this trifling insignificant 
matter ? This recluse lays too much emphasis on (exertion),’ and 
they do not give it up and they cause dissatisfaction to be nursed 
against me and against those monks who desire the training. This is 
for them, Udayin, a strong bond, a stout bond, a solid bond, a 
bond that does not rot away, a thick log of wood. 

But, Udayin, some young men of family here, on being told by me, 

4 Give this up,’ [ 460 ] speak thus: 4 But what of this trifling insig- 
nificant matter to be given up and of whose giving up the Lord speaks 
to us, and of whose rejection the Well-farer speaks to us ?’ And they 
give it up and they do not cause dissatisfaction to be nursed against 
me or against those monks who desire the training. These, giving 
that up, are unconcerned, unruffled, dependent on others, with a 
mind become as a wild creature’s. 1 This for them, Udayin, is a bond 
of no strength, a weak bond, a bond that rots away, a pithless bond. 
Udayin, it is like 2 a king’s bull-elephant whose tusks are as long as a 
plough-pole, who is massive, finely bred, whose home is the battle-field 
and who, if bound with a stout leather bond, 3 having easily twisted 
his body, having burst those bonds tearing them asunder, goes away 
as he pleases. Now, Udayin, if anyone should speak thus: 4 That 
king’s bull-elephant whose tusks are as long as a plough-pole . . . and 
who, if bound with a stout leather bond, having easily twisted his 
body, having burst those bonds tearing them asunder, goes away as 
he pleases; yet for him it was a strong bond, a stout bond, a solid 
bond, a bond that does not rot away, a thick log of wood ’ — would 
anyone speaking thus, Udayin, be speaking rightly V* 

“ No, revered sir. That king’s bull-elephant, revered sir, whose 
tusks are as long as a plough-pole . . . and who if bound with a stout 
leather bond, having easily twisted his body, having burst those 
bonds tearing them asunder, goes away as he pleases, because for 

1 As at Vin . ii. 184. See B.D. v. 259 for notes. 

* As at M . i. 414. 

* Cf. A . ii. 33; S. iii. 85, 



I. 450-451 On the Simile of the Quail 1 23 

him it is a bond of no strength, a weak bond, a bond that rots away, 
a pithless bond.” 

“ Eveii so, Udayin, some young men of family here, on being told 
by me, ‘ Give this up,’ speak thus: ‘ But what of this trifling insig- 
nificant matter to be given up and of whose giving up the Lord speaks 
to us and of whose rejection the Well-farer speaks to us ?” And they 
give it up and they do not cailse dissatisfaction to be nursed against 
me or against those monks who desire the training. These, giving 
that up, are unconcerned, unruffled, dependent on others, with a 
mind become as a wild creature’s. This for them, Udayin, is a weak 
bond, a bond of no strength, a bond that rots away, a pithless bond. 

And, Udayin, it is like a man, poor, needy, destitute, 1 * who has one 
little tumbledown 8 hovel, 3 open to the crows, unlovely to see, one 
tumbledown pallet, unlovely to see, his [ 451 ] grain and store-room 
in one jar, unlovely to see, his one wife unlovely to see. He might 
see a monk in a monastery, his hands and feet properly washed, 
who, after eating a delicious meal, was sitting in the cool shade intent 
on the higher thought. It might occur to him : 4 Indeed, recluseship 
is pleasant, indeed recluseship is healthy. Suppose that I, having 
cut off my hair and beard, having donned saffron robes, should go 
forth from home into homelessness ?’ But he might not be able to 
bring himself to give up his one little tumbledown hovel ... his one 
wife, unlovely to see, and to go forth from home into homelessness, 
having cut off his hair and beard and having donned saffron robes. 
Now, Udayin, if anyone should speak thus: 4 That man, bound by 
those bonds is unable, giving up his one little tumbledown hovel 
... his one wife, unlovely to see, to go forth from home into home- 
lessness, having cut off his hair and beard and having donned saffron 
robes, because for him it is a bond of no strength, a weak bond, a 
bond that rots away, a pithless bond — would anyone speaking thus, 
Udayin, be speaking rightly V ” 

“ No, revered sir. That man, bound by those bonds, is not able 
to give up his one little tumbledown hovel ... his one wife, unlovely 
to see, and to go forth from home into homelessness, having cut off 
his hair and beard and having donned saffron robes, because for him 
it is a strong bond, a stout bond, a solid bond, a bond that does not 
rot away, a thick log of wood.” 

“ Even so, Udayin, some foolish persons here, on being told by me, 


1 These three terms at M . ii. 178, A» iii. 351-2. * As at M. i. 80. 

* agdraka . MA. iii. 107 says khuddakageha , little house. 



124 


I. 461-452 


66. Laiukikopamasutta 

‘ Give this up/ speak thus: 4 But what of this trifling insignificant 
matter ? This recluse lays too much emphasis on (exertion).’ And 
they do not give it up and they cause dissatisfaction to be nursed 
against me and against those monks who desire the training. This 
is for them, Udayin, a strong bond, a stout bond, a solid bond, a bond 
that does not rot away, a thick log of wood. 

“ And, Udayin, it is like a householder or his son, rich, [462] of great 
wealth, of great possessions, with a mass of abundant gold ornaments, 1 
a mass of abundant com, a mass of abundant fields, with a mass of 
abundant raiment, with a mass of abundant wives, a mass of 
abundant men slaves, a mass of abundant women slaves. He might 
see a monk in a monastery, his hands and feet properly washed, 
who, after eating a delicious meal, was sitting in the cool shade intent 
on the higher thought. It might occur to him: ‘ Indeed recluseship 
is pleasant, indeed recluseship is healthy. Suppose that I, having 
cut off my hair and beard, having donned saffron robes, should go 
forth from home into homelessness ? ’ And he might be able to bring 
himself to give up his mass of abundant gold ornaments, his mass of 
abundant corn ... his mass of abundant women slaves, and to go 
forth from home into homelessness, having cut off his hair and beard 
and having donned saffron robes. If anyone should speak thus, 
Udayin; ‘ That householder or his son, bound by those bonds, is able 
to give up his mass of abundant gold ornaments, his mass of abundant 
fields, his mass of abundant raiment, his mass of abundant wives, 
his mass of abundant men slaves, his mass of abundant women 
slaves, and having cut off his hair and beard and having donned 
saffron robes, to go forth from home into homelessness, because for 
him it was a strong bond, a stout bond, a solid bond, a bond that 
does not rot away, a thick log of wood —would any one speaking 
thus, Udayin, be speaking rightly V* 

“ No, revered sir. That householder or householder’s son, revered 
sir, bound by those bonds, is able to give up his mass of abundant 
gold ornaments, his mass of abundant com ... his mass of abundant 
women slaves, and to go forth from home into homelessness, having 
cut off his hair and beard and donned saffron robes, because for him 
that was a bond of no strength, a weak bond, a bond that rots away, 
a pithless bond.” 

“ Even so, Udayin, some young men of family here, on being told 
by me, * Give this up/ speak thus: ‘ But what of this trifling insig- 


1 nikkhagana . 




1.452-453 On the Simile of the Quail 125 

nificant matter to be given up and of whose giving up the Lord speaks 
to us and of whose rejection the Well-farer speaks to us V And t hey 
give it up and they do not cause dissatisfaction to be nursed against 
me or against those monks who desire the training. These, [453] 
giving that up, are unconcerned, unruffled, dependent on others, 
with a mind become as a wild creature’s. This for them, Udayin, 
is a bond of no strength, a weak bond, a bond that rots away, a 
pithless bond. 

Udayin, these four types of persons are found existing in the world. 
What four ? As to this, Udayin, a certain person is faring along 
towards the getting rid of clinging, 1 towards the casting out of 
clinging. But while he is faring along towards the getting rid of 
clinging, towards the casting out of clinging, memories and thoughts 2 
belonging to clinging beset him. He gives in to them, he does not 
get rid of them, he does not dispel them, he does not make an end 
of them, he does not send them to destruction. I, Udayin, say that 
this person is fettered, 3 not unfettered. What is the reason for this ? 
Differences in faculties in this person are known to me, Udayin. 

And here, Udayin, some person is faring along towards the getting 
rid of clinging, towards the casting out of clinging. But while he is 
faring along towards the getting rid of clinging, towards the casting 
out of clinging, memories and thoughts belonging to clinging beset 
him. He does not give in to them, he gets rid of them, he dispels 
them, he makes an end of them, he sends them to destruction. But 
I say that this person is also fettered, Udayin, not unfettered. What 
is the reason for this ? Differences in faculties in this person are 
known to me, Udayin. 

And some person here, Udayin, is faring along towards the getting 
rid of clinging, towards the casting out of clinging. While he is 
faring along towards the getting rid of clinging, towards the casting 
out of clinging, from confusion in mindfulness memories and thoughts 
belonging to clinging at times beset him. Slow, Udayin, is the 
arising of mindfulness, and then he gets rid of it quickly, dispels it, 

makes an end of it, sends it to destruction, Udayin, it is'as if a man 
were to let two or three drops of water fall into an iron pot that had 
been heated all day long. Slow, Udayin, is the falling of the drops 
of water, but they would be quickly destroyed and consumed. Even 
so, Udayin, some person here is faring along towards the getting rid 


1 upadhi , a residual basis remaining for a new birth. 

* sara san kappa , as at M . iii. 89, 132, 8. iv. 70, 190. 


3 samyutta . 



126 


I. 453-454 


66. Latukikopama8utta 

of clinging, towards the casting out of clinging. While he is faring 
along towards the getting rid of clinging, towards the casting out of 
clinging, from confusion in mindfulness memories and thoughts 
belonging to clinging at times beset him. Slow, Udayin, is the 
arising of mindfulness, and then he gets rid of it quickly, dispels it, 
makes an end of it, sends it to destruction. I, Udayin, say that this 
person is also fettered, not unfettered. [454] What is the reason for 
this ? Differences in faculties in this person are known to me, 
Udayin. 

But some person here, Udayin, thinking, 4 Clinging is the root of 
anguish,’ and having understood it so, he is without clinging, freed 
by the destruction of clinging. I, Udayin, say that this person is 
unfettered, not fettered. What is the reason for this ? Differences 
in faculties in this person are known to me, Udayin. 

There are these five strands of sense-pleasures, 1 Udayin. What 
five ? Material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant, 
liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. Sounds 
cognisable by the ear . . . Smells cognisable by the nose . . . Tastes 
cognisable by the tongue . . . Touches cognisable by the body, 
agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, 
alluring. These, Udayin, are the five strands of sense-pleasures. 
Whatever happiness, whatever joy, Udayin, arises in consequence of 
these five strands of sense-pleasures, it is called a happiness of sense- 
pleasures that is a vile happiness, the happiness of an average person, 
an unariyan happiness. It should not be pursued, developed or 
made much of. I say of this happiness that it is to be feared. In 
this connection, Udayin, a monk, aloof from the pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the 
first meditation which is accompanied by initial thought and dis- 
cursive thought, is bom of aloofness, and is rapturous and joyful. 
By allaying initial and discursive thought, with the mind subjectively 
tranquillised and fixed on one point, he enters and abides in the 
second meditation which is devoid of initial and discursive thought, 
is bom of concentration, and is rapturous and joyful ... he enters 
and abides in the third meditation . . . the fourth meditation. This 
is called the happiness of renunciation, the happiness of aloofness, 
the happiness of tranquillity, the happiness of self-awakening. 2 It 
should be pursued, developed and made much of. I say of this 
happiness that it is not to be feared. 


1 As at M. i. 86. 

* These four * happinesses/ sukha , occur also at A . iv. 341-342. 



I. 454-455 


127 


On the Simile of the Quail 

As to this, Udayin, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the senses . , . 
enters and abides in the first meditation which is . . . rapturous and 
joyful. I, Udayin, say that this is in the unstable. 1 And what is 
in the unstable there ? That very initial and discursive thought that 
is not stopped there— this is in the unstable there. As to this, 
Udayin, a monk, by allaying initial and discursive thought . . . enters 
and abides in the second meditation which is . . ., rapturous and 
joyful. I, Udayin, say that this too is in the unstable. And what is 
in the unstable there ? That very rapture and joy that are not 
stopped there — these are in the unstable there. As to this, Udayin, 
a monk, by the fading out of rapture, dwells with equanimity, atten- 
tive and clearly conscious . . . and enters and abides in the third 
meditation. I, Udayin, say that this too is in the unstable. And 
what is in the unstable there ? That very happiness in equanimity 
[455] that is not stopped there — this is in the unstable there. As 
to this, Udayin, a monk, by getting rid of happiness and by getting 
rid of anguish . . . enters and abides in the fourth meditation which 
... is entirely purified by equanimity and mindfulness. I, Udayin, 
say that this is in the stable. 

As to this, Udayin, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the senses . . . 
enters and abides in the first meditation . . . which is rapturous and 
joyful. I, Udayin, say, ‘ This is not enough/ I say, ‘ Get rid of it/ 
I say, ‘ Transcend it/ And what, Udayin, is its transcending ? As 
to this, Udayin, a monk, by allaying initial and discursive thought 
. . . enters and abides in the second meditation. This is its transcend- 
ing. But I, Udayin, again say, ‘ This is not enough/ 1 say, 1 Get rid of 
it/ I say, ‘ Transcend it/ And what is its transcending ? As to this, 
Udayin, a monk, by the fading out of rapture . . . enters and abides 
in the third meditation. This is its transcending. But I, Udayin, 
againsay, * Thisis not enough/ 1 say, 1 Getridofit/ 1 say, * Transcend 
it/ And what is its transcending ? As to this, Udayin, a monk, by 
getting rid of happiness . . . enters and abides in the fourth meditation. 
This is its transcending. But I, Udayin, again say, 4 This is not 
enough/ 1 say , 1 Get rid of it/ I say, * Transcend it . 7 And what is its 
transcending ? As to this, Udayin, a monk, by wholly transcending 
perception of material shapes, by the going down of perception due 
to sensory impressions, by not attending to perception of variety, 
thinking, 4 Ether is unending/ enters and abides in the plane of 


1 injitasmifk , what can be stirred or moved. Cf. S. i. 109: there is no 

instability in the wholly freed Buddhas. Cf. also S. iv. 202, Sn . 750. 



128 


I. 456-456 


66. Latukikopamasutta 

infinite ether. This is its transcending. But I, Udayin, again say, 
* This is not enough/ I say, * Get rid of it/ I say, * Transcend it/ 
And what is its transcending ? As to this, Udayin, a monk, by 
wholly transcending the plane of infinite ether, thinking, ‘ Conscious- 
ness is unending/ enters and abides in the plane of infinite con- 
sciousness. This is its transcending. But I, Udayin, again say, 
‘ This is not enough/ I say, ‘ Get rid of it/ I say, ‘ Transcend it/ 
And what is its transcending ? As to this, Udayin, a monk, by 
wholly transcending the plane of infinite consciousness, thinking, 
‘ There is not anything/ enters and abides in the plane of no-thing. 
This is its transcending. But I, Udayin, again say, ‘ This is not 
enough/ I say, * Get rid of it/ I say, * Transcend it/ And what is its 
transcending ? As to this, Udayin, a monk, by wholly transcending 
the plane of no-thing, enters and abides in the plane of neither- 
perception-nor-non-perception. [456] This is its transcending. But 
I, Udayin, again say, ‘ This is not enough/ 1 say, * Get rid of it/ 1 say, 
‘ Transcend it/ And what is its transcending ? As to this, Udayin, 
a monk, by wholly transcending the plane of neither-perception- 
nor-non-perception, enters and abides in the stopping of perception 
and feeling. This is its transcending. It is for this that I, Udayin, 
speak even of the getting rid of the plane of neither-perception-nor 
non-perception. Now do you, Udayin, see any fetter, minute or 
massive, of the getting rid of which I have not spoken to you V n 
“ No, revered sir.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Udayin rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on the Simile of the Quail: 

The Sixth 


67. DISCOURSE AT CATUMA 

(Catumasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Catuma 
in the Myrobalan Grove. Now at that time at least five hundred 

1 Quoted at MA. ii. 109 in explanation of “ even (right) states of mind are 
to be got rid of/* as said at end of the Parable of the Raft. 



I. 456-457 


At Catuma 


129 


monks, 1 with Sariputta and Moggallana 2 at their head had arrived 
at Catuma to see the Lord, and there was a loud noise, a great noise 
as these incoming monks were exchanging greetings with the resident 
monks, while lodgings were being prepared and bowls and robes 
were being put away. Then the Lord addressed the venerable 
Ananda, saying: “ What, Ananda, is this loud noise, this great noise, 
which seems like that of fisherfolk when hauling in a catch ?” 

“ Revered sir, these monks, at least five hundred, with Sariputta 
and Moggallana at their head have arrived at Catuma to see the 
Lord, and while the incoming monks are exchanging greetings with 
the resident monks, while lodgings are being prepared and bowls and 
robes are being put away, there is a loud noise, a great noise.” 

“ Well then, Ananda, in my name summon these monks, saying: 
‘ The Teacher is summoning the venerable ones.’ ” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” and the venerable Ananda, having answered 
the Lord in assent, approached these monks; having approached, he 
spoke thus to these monks : “ The Teacher is summoning the venerable 
ones.” 

“ Yes, your reverence,” and these [457] monks, having answered 
the venerable Ananda in assent, approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a respectful 
distance. The Lord spoke thus to these monks as they were sitting 
down at a respectful distance : “ Do not you, monks, think that the 
loud noise, the great noise is like that of fisherfolk when hauling in a 
catch ?” 

“ Revered sir, at least five hundred monks with Sariputta and 
Moggallana at their head have arrived at Catuma to see the Lord, 
and while . , . bowls and robes are being put away, there is a loud 
noise, a great noise.” 

w Go away, monks, I dismiss you, you should not stay near me.” 

“ Very well, revered sir,” and these monks having answered the 
Lord in assent, having greeted the Lord keeping their right sides 
towards him, having packed away their lodgings, departed taking 
their bowls and robes. 

1 This passage also occurs at Ud. 24-25, where Yasoja is at the head of 
500 monks, but the episode is there placed at S&vatthI, These monks were 
perhaps only recently ordained, and that is why the two chief disciples were 
in charge of them. MA, iii. 172 speaks of them as kvlaputta, as though hardly 
recognising their passage to monk’s status. But with this compare the first 
speech ascribed to the Lord in the next Discourse where he refers to those 
who have gone forth both as young men of family and as monks. 

* No epithet * venerable ’ here. 




130 


67. Cdtumasutta 


I. 467-458 


Now at that time the Sakyans of Catuma were assembled in the 
conference hall on some business or other. The Sakyans of Catuma 
saw these monks coming in the distance; having seen them, they 
approached these monks; having approached, they spoke thus to 
these monks: “ Now, wherg are you, venerable ones, going ?” 

“ Friends, the Order of monks has been dismissed by the Lord.’ 1 

“ Well then, venerable ones, sit down for a moment; perhaps we 
could reconcile the Lord.” 

“ Very well, friends,” these monks answered the Sakyans of 
Catuma in assent. Then the Sakyans of Catuma approached the 
Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down 
at a respectful distance. As they were sitting down at a respectful 
distance, the Sakyans of Catuma spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ Revered sir, let the Lord rejoice the Order of monks, let the 
Lord greet the Order of monks. Revered sir, even as the Order of 
monks was helped previously by the Lord, so let the Lord help the 
Order of monks now. There are here, 1 revered sir, new monks, not 
long gone forth, quite recently come into this dhamma and discipline. 
Not getting a chance to see the Lord, there may be faltering 2 for 
them, there may be vicissitudes. 3 Even, revered sir, as there may be 
faltering and vicissitudes for young seeds if they do not get water, 
even so, revered sir, there are here [468] new monks, not long 
gone forth, quite recently come into this dhamma and discipline; if 
they do not get a chance to see the Lord, there may be faltering for 
them, there may be vicissitudes. And even, revered sir, as there 
may be faltering, as there may be vicissitudes for a young calf that 
does not see its mother, so, revered sir, there are here new monks, 
not long gone forth, quite recently come into this dhamma and 
discipline. Not seeing the Lord, there may be faltering for them, 
there may be vicissitudes. Revered sir, let the Lord rejoice the 
Order of monks, let the Lord greet the Order of monks. Revered sir, 
even as the Order of monks was helped previously by the Lord, so 
let the Lord help the Order of monks now.” 

Then Brahma Sahampati, 4 knowing by mind the reasoning in the 
Lord’s mind, as a strong man might stretch forth his bent arm or 


V Cf. 8. lii. 91. 

* annathatia, “ otherness.” See M . i. 448 (“ depression ”), il. 61, and 
8 . iii. 91-92. 

* viparindma , change, falling away. 

4 The persuasions of Brahma Sahampati and the Sakyans of CatumS are 
referred to at MUn . 209/. 




I. 468-459 


At Catuma 


131 


might bend back his outstretched arm, even so, vanishing from the 
Brahma-world he appeared before the Lord. Then Brahma 
Sahampati, arranging his outer robe over one shoulder, saluting the 
Lord with joined palms, spoke thus to the Lord: “ Revered sir, let 
the Lord rejoice the Order of monks . . . (repeat as for the Sakyans of 
Catuma) . . . Revered sir, even as the Order of monks was helped 
previously by the Lord, [459] so let the Lord help the Order of monks 
now.” 

The Sakyans of Catuma and Brahma Sahampati were able to 
reconcile the Lord by the analogy of the seeds and the analogy of the 
young 1 (calf). Then the venerable Moggallana the Great addressed 
the monks, saying: “ Arise, your reverences, pick up your bowls and 
robes, the Lord has been reconciled by the Sakyans of Catuma and by 
Brahma Sahampati with the analogy of the seeds and the analogy 
of the young (calf).” 

“ Yes, your reverence,” and these monks, having answered the 
venerable Moggallana the Great in assent, rising from their seats, 
taking their bowls and robes, approached the Lord ; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a respectful 
distance. The Lord spoke thus to the venerable Sariputta as he was 
sitting down at a respectful distance: 

“ What did you, Sariputta, think when the Order of monks was 
dismissed by me ?” 

“ When the Order of monks was dismissed by the Lord, I, revered 
sir, thought: * The Lord is now unconcerned, he will abide intent on 
abiding in ease here and now. 2 We too, unconcerned now, will abide 
intent on abiding in ease here and now.’ ” 

“ Do you wait, Sariputta, do you wait, Sariputta. Sariputta, 
never let such a thought arise in you again.” 3 Then the Lord 
addressed the venerable Moggallana the Great, saying: 

“ What did you, Moggallana, think when the Order of monks was 
dismissed by me ?” 

“ When the Order of monks was dismissed by the Lord, I, revered 
sir, thought: 1 The Lord is now unconcerned, he will abide intent on 


1 iarunupama, as at M. i. 432, of a young baby. 

* Except for the tense, these words are identical with Devadatta's at 
Vin. ii. 188. 

* According to MA. iii. 170, the Elder did not know his duty (bharabhdva), 
which was, as was Moggallan&’s, to the Order of monks — as shown by the 
latter’s answer; therefore he was commended for it. It is not often that 
SSriputta is rebuked by Gotama, but see jlf. ii. 195, and Intr. p. xxvi. 




132 67. Cdtumasutta I. 459-460 

abiding in ease here and now, I and the venerable Sariputta will 
now lead the Order of monks.’ ” 

“ It is good, Moggallana, it is good. For either I, Moggallana, 
could lead the Order of monks, or Sariputta and Moggallana.” 1 

Then the Lord addressed the Order of monks, saying: “ Monks, 
these four perils for one going down to the water 2 are to be expected. 
What four ? Peril of waves, peril of crocodiles, 3 peril of whirlpools, 
peril of fierce fishes. 4 5 These are the four perils to be expected for 
one going down to the water. Similarly, monks, four perils are to 
be expected for some persons here who have gone forth from home 
into homelessness in this dhamma and discipline. [ 460 ] What four ? 
Peril of waves, peril of crocodiles, peril of whirlpools, peril of fierce 
fishes. 

And what, monks, is the peril of waves ? Here, monks, some 
young man of family, gone forth from home into homelessness through 
faith, thinks: 4 Although I am oppressed by birth, ageing, dying, by 
grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation ' and despair, oppressed by 
anguish, overcome by anguish, yet perhaps some ending of this 
whole mass of anguish may be seen.’ His fellow Brahma-farers 
exhort and instruct him who has thus gone forth: 4 Thus should you 
go out, thus should you return, thus should you look in front, thus 
should you look round, thus should you bend out (your arm), thus 
should you bend it back, thus should you carry your outer cloak, 
your bowl and robe.’ If it occurs to him: 4 While I was formerly in 
the household state, we used to exhort and instruct others, but these 
who seem like our sons, who seem like our grandsons, think that they 
should exhort and instruct us ’ — then, disavowing the training, he 
returns to the low life of the world. This one, monks, who disavows 
the training and returns to the low life of the world is called one who 
is scared by the peril of waves. 4 The peril of waves,’ monks, is a 
synonym for angry wrath. 6 

And what, monks, is the peril of crocodiles ? Here, monks, some 
young man of family who has gone forth from home into homeless- 
ness through faith, thinks: 4 Although I am oppressed by birth . . . 


1 At D. ii. 100, Gotama tells Ananda that it does not occur to a TathSgata: 

4 1 will lead the Order of monks.* At Vin . ii. 188 he tells Oevadatta he would 
not hand over (na nissajjeyyam) the Order of monks eve" to Sariputta and 
Moggallana. See Intr. p. xxvii. 

9 Cf. A, ii. 123 ff. 9 Referred to at Thlg. 602. 

4 Referred to among the many perils or fears, bkaya , at MUn. 196. 

5 Another synonym for this is given at M. i. 144. 



I. 460-461 


At Cdtuma 


133 


yet perhaps some ending of this whole mass of anguish may be seen.’ 
His fellow Brahma-farers exhort and instruct him who has thus gone 
forth: * This can be eaten 1 by you, this cannot be eaten by you, this 
can be partaken of by you, this cannot be partaken of by you, this 
can be savoured by you, this cannot be savoured by you, this can be 
drunk by you, this cannot be drunk by you; you should eat what is 
allowable, you should not eat what is not allowable, you should 
partake of what is allowable, you should not partake of what is not 
allowable, you should savour what is allowable, you should not 
savour what is not allowable, you should drink what is allowable, 
you should not drink what is not allowable ; you should eat at the 
right time, you should not eat at the wrong time, you should partake 
of at the right time, you should not partake of at the wrong time, 
you should savour at the right time, you should not savour at the 
wrong time, you Bhould drink at the right time, you should not 
drink at the wrong time.’ If it occurs to him [461] ‘ Formerly when 
I was in the household state we ate what we liked, we did not eat 
what we did not like, we partook of what we liked, we did not partake 
of what we did not like, we savoured what we liked, we did not savour 
what we did not like, we drank what we liked, we did not drink 
what we did not like ; we ate what was allowable and we ate what was 
not allowable, we partook of what was allowable and we partook 
of what was not allowable, we savoured what was allowable and we 
savoured what was not allowable, we drank what was allowable 
and we drank what was not allowable; we ate at the right time and 
we ate at the wrong time, we partook of at the right time and we 
partook of at the wrong time, we savoured at the right time and we 
savoured at the wrong time, we drank at the right time and we drank 
at the wrong time. But when those householders who have faith 
give us sumptuous foods, solid and soft, at a wrong time, during the 
day, it seems as if they are putting restraint over the mouth ,a — 
and disavowing the training, he returns to the low life of the world. 
This one, monks, who disavowing the training, returns to the low 
life of the world, is called one who is scared by the peril of crocodiles. 

4 The peril of crocodiles,’ monks, is a synonym for gluttony. 

And what, monks, is the peril of whirlpools ? Here, monks, some 
young man of family who has gone forth from home into homeless- 

1 Jchaditalbam, referring to eating solid food, and bhuiijitabbam (partake 
of) to eating soft food. 

* mukhavaranath karonti . Amrana is a prohibition, interdiction, ob- 
struction, covering. 



134 


67. CdtumastUta 


I. 461-462 


ness through faith, thinks; ‘ I am oppressed by birth . . . but perhaps 
some ending can be seen of this whole mass of anguish.’ He, gone 
forth thus, having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, 
enters a village or market town for almsfood unguarded as to his 
body, unguarded as to his speech, 1 mindfulness not set up, the sense- 
organs uncontrolled. He there sees a householder or a house- 
holder’s son indulging in and provided with the five strands of 
sense-pleasures, and finding delight in them. If it occurs to him; 

‘ Formerly while we were in the household state, indulging in and 
provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures, we found delight 
in them. As there is wealth in my home, it is possible both to enjoy 
wealth and to do meritorious things,’ he, disavowing the training, 
returns to the low life of the world. This one, monks who, dis- 
avowing the training, returns to the low life of the world, is called 
one who is scared of the peril of whirlpools. ‘ The peril of whirlpools,’ 
monks, is a synonym for the five strands of sense-pleasures. 

And what, monks, is the peril of fierce fishes ? Here, monks, 
[ 462 ] some young man of family who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness through faith, thinks: * I am oppressed by birth . . . 
but perhaps some ending to this whole mass of anguish can be seen.* 
He, gone forth thus, having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl 
and robe, enters a village or a market town for almsfood unguarded in 
his body, unguarded in his speech, mindfulness not set up, the sense- 
organs uncontrolled. He sees a woman there 2 who is improperly 
dressed or improperly clothed. When he has seen that woman who 
is improperly dressed or improperly clothed, passion corrupts his 
mind, and with his mind corrupted by passion, disavowing the 
training he returns to the low life of the world. This one, monks, 
who disavowing the training, returns to the low life of the world, is 
called one who is scared by the peril of fierce fishes. * The peril of 
fierce fishes,’ monks, is a synonym for women. 

These monks, are the four perils to be expected for some persons 
here who have gone forth from home into homelessness in this 
dhamma and discipline.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 

Discourse at Catuma: 

The Seventh 

1 A. ii. 125 inserts (rightly) arakkhitena cittern , unguarded as to his thought. 

* Cf. 8. ii. 231, 271; A. iii. 95. 




68. DISCOURSE AT NALAKAPANA 

(Nalakapanasutta) 1 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying among the 
Kosalans near Nalakapana 2 in the Judas-tree Grove. 3 Now at that 
time many well known young men of family had gone forth from 
home into homelessness through faith in the Lord : the venerable 
Anuruddha 4 and the venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila 
and the venerable Bhagu 5 and the venerable Kuijdadhana 6 and the 
venerable Revata and the venerable Ananda, and many other well 
known young men of family. Now at that time the Lord [463] was 
sitting in the open surrounded by an Order of monks. Then the 
Lord addressed the monks concerning these young men of family, 
saying: “ Those young men of family, monks, who have gone forth 
from home into homelessness through faith in me — I hope, monks, 
that these monks are finding delight in the Brahma-faring V 9 When 
he had spoken thus, these monks became silent. And a second 
time . . . and a third time the Lord addressed the monks concerning 
these young men of family, saying: “ Those young men of family, 
monks, who have gone forth from home into homelessness through 
faith in me — I hope, monks, that these monks are finding delight in 
the Brahma-faring ?” And a third time these monks became silent. 

Then it occurred to the Lord: “Now, suppose that I were to 
question these young men of family themselves V 9 Then the Lord 
addressed the venerable Anuruddha, saying: “ I hope that you, 
Anuruddhas, 7 are finding delight in the Brahma-faring ?” 

“ Certainly we, revered sir, are finding delight in the Brahma- 
faring.” 

1 Gf, Ji it No, 20 which describes how the Bodhisatta, as a monkey, taught 
his followers to drink water through a hollow reed; referred to at MA. lil. 178. 

1 Cf. A . v. 122, 125. 

* Paldsavana . MA. iii, 180 says that palasa is Jcimsuka, “strange.” 
PSD. gives Butea frondosa. The PalSsajStaka is at Jd. iii. 23. Cf. also 
the simile of the kimsuha at 8. iv. 193. 

4 For some of the following names see M . i. 205, 212, iii. 155; Vin. ii. 128. 

1 His verses are at Thag. 271-274. See Vin . i. 350. 

* His verses are at Thag. 15. He has a place among the etad aggas at A. i. 24. 

7 For use of plural, Anuruddh&, soo M.L.8. i. 257, n. 4, 

135 



136 68. Nalakapdnasutta I. 463-464 

“ It is good, it is good, Anuruddhas. This is fitting in you, 
Anuruddhas, who are young men of family gone forth from home 
into homelessness through faith, that you should find delight in the 
Brahma-faring. Yet while you, Anuruddhas, possessed of radiant 
youth, in the prime of your lives, with coal-black hair, might be 
enjoying the pleasures of the senses, you, Anuruddhas, although 
possessed of radiant youth, in the prime of your lives, with coal- 
black hair, have nevertheless gone forth from home into homeless- 
ness. But you, Anuruddhas, are neither those that have gone forth 
from home into homelessness on the suggestion of kings 1 nor those 
who have gone forth from home into homelessness on the suggestion 
of thieves . . . nor because of debt , . . nor through fear, 2 nor are you 
those that have gone forth from home into homelessness because of 
having lost the means of livelihood. Yet was it not with the thought : 
* Although I am oppressed by birth, ageing, dying, by grief, sorrow, 
suffering, lamentation and despair, oppressed by anguish, beset by 
anguish, yet perhaps some ending of this whole mass of anguish may 
be seen/ that you, Anuruddhas, have gone forth from home into 
homelessness through faith V’ 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ And when, Anuruddhas, a young man of family has gone forth 
thus, what is there to be done by him ? Anuruddhas, aloof from 
pleasures of the senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, if he does 
not win joy and happiness or something more peaceful than that, 3 
then coveting persists in obsessing his mind, and malevolence persists 
in obsessing his mind, and sloth and torpor . . . and restlessness and 
worry . . . and doubt . . . [ 464 ] and discontent . . . and apathy persists 
in obsessing his mind. Aloof, Anuruddhas, from pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, he does not win joy and 
happiness or something more peaceful than that. Anuruddhas, 
aloof from pleasures of the senses, aloof from unskilled states of 
mind, if he wins joy and happiness and something more peaceful 
than that, then coveting does not persist in obsessing his mind, and 

1 (7/. Iti. § 91; 3, iii. 93; Miln. 32. If a king or thieves to whom someone 
has done a wrong catch him, they say: 1 If you will go forth, you can be free, ’ 
MA. iii. 180. 

1 If he is scared by a certain peril or fear (bhaya) — of a king and so forth, he 
goes forth. SA, ii. 302 gives the “ perils ” as those regarding kings, thieves, 
hunger, illness and debt. 

8 M A, iii. 181 says that if at this stage he does not win joy and so on, then 
he does not win the more peaceful happiness of the two following jhdna and 
the four ways. 



I. 464 AtNahkapana 137 

malevolence . * . and sloth and torpor . . . and restlessness and worry 
. . . and doubt . , . and discontent . . . and apathy does not persist in 
obsessing his mind. Aloof, Anuruddhas, from pleasures of the 
senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, he wins joy and happiness 
and something more peaceful than that. 

What do you think about me, Anuruddhas ? That those cankers 
which have to do with the defilements, 1 with again-becoming, which 
are fearful, whose result is anguish, making for birth, ageing and dying 
in the future — that these have not been got rid of by the Tathagata, 
and that therefore the Tathagata, having considered 2 , pursues one 
thing; having considered, endures another thing; having considered, 
avoids another thing; having considered, controls another thing ?” 3 

“ We, revered sir, do not think this of the Lord, that those cankers 
which have to do with the defilements, with again-becoming . . . 
making for birth, ageing and dying in the future — that these have not 
been got rid of by the Tathagata, and that therefore the Tathagata, 
having considered, pursues one thing; having considered, endures 
another thing; having considered, avoids another thing; having 
considered, controls another thing. We, revered sir, think this of the 
Lord, that those cankers that have to do with the defilements, with 
again-becoming . . . making for birth, ageing and dying in the future 
—that these have been got rid of by the Tathagata, and that there- 
fore the Tathagata, having considered, pursues one thing; having 
considered, endures another thing; having considered, avoids another 
thing; having considered, controls another thing.” 

“ It is good, it is good, Anuruddhas. 4 Those cankers of the 
Tathagata that had to do with the defilements, with again-becoming, 
that were fearful, whose result was anguish, making for birth, ageing 
and dying in the future — these have been got rid of, cut off at the 
root, made like a palm-tree stump that can come to no further 
existence in the future. Even, Anuruddhas, as a palm-tree whose 
crown is cut off can come to no further growth, so, Anuruddhas, 
those cankers of the Tathagata that had to do with the defilements 
... can come to no further existence in the future. Therefore the 
Tathagata, having considered, pursues one thing; having considered, 
endures another thing; having considered, avoids another thing; 
having considered, controls another thing. 

1 As at M. i. 250. * sankhaya, as at A . ii. 143. 

* Cf % M. i. 7 for these ways of dealing with -the cankers. These four phrases 

are used in connection with the four apassena at D , iii. 224. 

4 This paragraph also at M . i. 250. 




138 68. Nalakapdnasutta I. 464-465 

What do you think about this, Anuruddhas ? Beholding what 
special purpose does the Tathagata explain the uprisings in which 
are disciples who have deceased and passed away, saying: * Such a 
one has uprisen in one, such a one has uprisen in another 1 V ” 

[465] “ Things for us, revered sir, are rooted in the Lord, have the 
Lord for conduit, the Lord for arbiter. It were good indeed, revered 
sir, if the meaning of this speech of the Lord’s were explained; 
having heard the Lord, the monks would remember/’ 2 
M Anuruddhas, tke T&tKagata does not have the purpose 3 of 
defrauding people nor the purpose of cajoling people nor the purpose 
of gains, honour, fame and material advantages, nor the thought: 

‘ Let people know me thus when he explains the uprisings in which 
are disciples who have deceased and passed away, saying: 4 Such a 
one has uprisen in one, such a one has uprisen in another/ But there 
are, Anuruddhas, young men of family who have faith and are of 
great enthusiasm, 6 of great joyousness and who, having heard this, 
focus their minds on suchness. 6 Anuruddhas, this will be for their 
weal and happiness for a long time. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a monk hears : 4 The monk so and so has 
passed away; it is declared by the Lord that he is established in 
profound knowledge/ If a venerable one has himself seen or has 
heard by hearsay that the venerable one was of such moral habit and 
that the venerable one was of such mentality 7 and that the venerable 
one was of such wisdom and that the venerable one was such an abider 
and that the venerable one was freed thus, he, while recollecting his 
faith and moral habit and learning and giving up and wisdom, focusses 
his mind on suchness. It is thus, Anuruddhas, that there is abiding 
in comfort for a monk. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a monk hears: 4 The monk so and so has 
passed away; it is declared by the Lord that by the utter destruction 
of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore), he is of spontaneous 
generation, one that has attained nibbana there, not liable to return 
from that world/ If a venerable one has himself seen or has heard 

~ C/ D, ii. 200. ^ As at if. i. 310. 3 Cf. hi. § 35, 36; A. ii. 26. 

4 MA. iii. 182, “ the multitude will know me thus, a lovely report will go 
forth about me among the multitude.” 

4 vlaraveda , MA. iii. 182 saying mahaniatutthino. 

* tathatidya , the state of being so; but possibly here meaning that they 
imitate the monks who have died. 

* evamdhammo . Here dhamma , between slla and pannd , seems to take 
the place of the more usual samddhi or cxtta , and so means having (right) 
mental objects. 



I. 466-466 


139 


At Nalakapana 

by hearsay that the venerable one was of such moral habit ... of 
such mentality , . . of such wisdom . . . was such an abider . . . was 
freed thus, he, while recollecting his faith and . . . wisdom, focusses 
his mind on suchness. It is thus too, Anuruddhas, that there is 
abiding in comfort for a monk. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a monk hears : ‘ The monk so and so has 
passed away; it is declared by the Lord that by the utter destruction 
of the three fetters, by the reduction of attachment, aversion and 
confusion, he is a once-returner who, having come back once only 
to this world, will make an end of anguish/ If a venerable one has 
himself seen or has heard by hearsay that the venerable one was of 
such moral habit . . . was freed thus, he, while recollecting his faith 
and . . . wisdom, focusses his mind on suchness. [466] It is thus 
too, Anuruddhas, that there is abiding in comfort for a monk. 

In this ease, Anuruddhas, a monk hears: * The monk so and so has 
passed away; it is declared by the Lord that by the utter destruction 
of the three fetters he is a stream-attainer, not liable to the Downfall, 
assured, bound for enlightenment/ If a venerable one has himself 
seen or has heard by hearsay that the venerable one was of such 
moral habit ... of such mentality ... of such wisdom . . . was such 
an abider . . . was freed thus, he, while recollecting his faith and 
moral habit and learning and giving up and wisdom, focusses his 
mind on suchness. It is thus, Anuruddhas, that there is abiding in 
comfort for a monk. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a nun hears: ‘ The nun so and so has 
passed away; it is declared of her by the Lord that she is established 
in profound knowledge/ If that sister has herself seen or has heard 
by hearsay that that sister was of such moral habit . . . mentality 
. . . wisdom . . . such an abider . . . was freed thus, she, while recol- 
lecting her faith and moral habit and learning and giving up and 
wisdom, focusses her mind on suchness. It is thus, Anuruddhas that 
there is abiding in comfort for a nun. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a nun hears: ‘ The nun so and so has 
passed away; it is declared of her by the Lord that by the utter 
destruction of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore), she is of 
spontaneous- generation, one that has attained nibbana there, not 
liable to return from that world ... It is declared of her by the Lord 
that by the utter destruction of the three fetters, by the reduction 
of attachment, aversion, confusion, she is a once-returner who, 
having come back once only to this world, will make an end of 
anguish ... It is declared of her by the Lord that by the utter 



140 68. Nalakapdnasutta I. 466-468 

destruction of the three fetters she is a stream-attainer, not liable 
to the Downfall, assured, bound for enlightenment.’ [467] If that 
sister has herself seen or has heard by hearsay that that sister was of 
such moral habit . . . was freed thus, she, while recollecting her faith 
. . . and wisdom, focusses her mind on suchness. It is thus, Anurud- 
dhas, that there is abiding in comfort for a nun. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a layfollower hears: * The layfollower 
so and so has passed away; it is declared of him by the Lord that by 
the utter destruction of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore), 
he is of spontaneous generation, one that has attained nibbana there, 
not liable to return from that world ... It is declared of him by the 
Lord that by the utter destruction of the three fetters, by the 
reduction of attachment, aversion, confusion, he is a once-retumer 
who, having come back once only to this world, will make an end 
of anguish ... It is declared of him by the Lord that by the utter 
destruction of the three fetters, he is a stream-attainer, not liable to 
the Downfall, assured, bound for enlightenment. ’ If that layfollower 
has himself seen or has heard by hearsay that that layfollower was 
of such moral habit . . . was freed thus, he, while recollecting his 
faith . . . and wisdom, focusses his mind on suchness. It is thus, 
Anuruddhas, that there is abiding in comfort for a layfollower. 

In this case, Anuruddhas, a laywoman follower hears, c The 
laywoman follower so and so has passed away; it is declared of her 
by the Lord that by the utter destruction of the five fetters binding 
to this lower (shore), she is of spontaneous generation, one that 
has attained nibbana there, not liable to return from that world 
. . . [468] ... It is declared of her by the Lord that by the utter 
destruction of the three fetters, by the reduction of attachment, 
aversion, confusion, she is a once-returner who, having come back 
cnee only to this world, will make an end of anguish ... It is declared 
of her by the Lord that by the utter destruction of the three fetters, 
she is a stream-attainer, not liable to the Downfall, assured, bound 
for enlightenment.’ If that sister has herself seen or has heard 
by hearsay that that sister was of such moral habit and that that 
sister was of such mentality and that that sister was of such wisdom 
and that sister was such an abider and that sister was freed 
thus, she, while recollecting her faith and moral habit and learning 
and giving up and wisdom, focusses her mind on suchness. It is 
thus, Anuruddhas, that there is abiding in comfort for a laywoman 
follower. 

The Tathagata, Anuruddhas, does not have the purpose of de- 



I. 468-469 


141 


At Nalakapana 

frauding people nor the purpose of cajoling people nor the purpose 
of gains, honour, fame and material advantages, nor the thought: 
‘ Let people know me thus ’ when he explains the uprising in which 
are disciples who have deceased and passed away, saying: * Such and 
such a one has upriseninone, such a one has uprisen in another.’ But 
there are, Anuruddhas, young men of family who have faith and are 
of great enthusiasm, of great joyousness, and who, having heard 
this, focus their minds on suchness. Anuruddhas, this will be for 
their weal and happiness for a long time,” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Anuruddha 
rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse at Nalakapana: 

The Eighth 


69. DISCOURSE ON GULISSANI 

(Gulissanisutta) 

[ 469 ] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels* feeding place. At 
that time a monk named Gulissani, forest-gone, uncouth in his habits, 
had arrived in the midst of an Order on some business or other. 
Thereupon the venerable Sariputta addressed the monks concerning 
the monk Gulissani, saying: 

“ Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back 
to an Order and is staying with an Order, should be deferential and 
respectful towards his fellow Brahma-farers. If, your reverences, 
a monk who is forest-gone comes back to an Order and is staying 
with an Order, and is not deferential and respectful towards his 
fellow Brahma-farers, there will be those who speak about him and 
say: * What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone and 
who lives alone in the forest doing as he pleases but who is not 
deferential and respectful towards his fellow Brahma-farers V — 
there will be those who speak about him. Therefore a monk who is 
forest-gone and who has come back to an Order and is staying with 



142 69. Gvlissanisutta I. 469-470 

an Order should be deferential and respectful towards his fellow* 
Brahma-farers. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back 
to an Order and is staying with an Order, should be skilled about the 
seats, thinking: * Iwill sit down not encroaching on 1 * (the space inten- 
ded for) monks who are elders, nor will I keep newly ordained monks 
from a seat.** If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone comes 
back to an Order and is staying with an Order, and is not skilled 
about the seats, there will be those who speak about him and say: 
* What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone and who 
lives alone in the forest doing what he pleases but who does not even 
know the rule about decent conduct V — there will be those who 
speak about him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone and who has 
come back to an Order and is staying with an Order should be skilled 
about the seats. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back 
to an Order and is staying with an Order, should not enter a village 
too early nor return 3 during the day. If, your reverences, a monk 
who is forest-gone comes back to an Order and is staying with an 
Order, and enters a village too early and returns during the day, 
there will be those who speak about him and say: ‘ What is the good 
of this venerable one who is forest-gone and who lives alone in the 
forest doing as he pleases but who enters a village too early and 
returns during the day V~ there will be those who speak about him. 
Therefore a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back to an 
Order and is staying with an Order should not enter a village too 
early and should not return during the day. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone ... is staying with an 
Order, should not [470] call upon families before a meal or after a 
meal. 4 If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone comes back 
to an Order and is staying with an Order, and calls upon families 
before a meal or after a meal, there will be those who will speak about 
him and say: * Is not this walking at a wrong time frequently 
practised by this venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone in the 
forest doing as he pleases, and does not he also boast about it to one 
who is in the Order V — there will be those who speak about him. 


1 Vin. i v. 43; cf. Vin. ii. 88. * Cf. Vin. i. 47. 

1 I.e. to the monastery. See Paeifctiya 86 (Vin. iv. 164 ff.) t and Nuns’ 

Pficittiya 17 ( Vin. iv. 274). 

4 See Pficittiya 46 ( Vin. iv. 99 /.). 



I. 470 


On Gulissdni 


143 


Therefore a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back to an Order 
and is staying with an Order should call upon families neither before 
a meal nor after a meal. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone and who comes back 
to an Order and is staying with an Order, should not be proud or 
inconsiderate . 1 If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone 
comes back to an Order and is staying with an Order, is proud and 
inconsiderate, there will be those who speak about him and say: 
* Is not this pride and inconsiderateness frequently practised by this 
venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone in a forest doing as he 
pleases, and does not he also boast about it to one who is in the 
Order V — there will be those that speak about him. Therefore a 
monk who is forest-gone and who comes back to an Order and is 
staying with an Order should not be proud and inconsiderate. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone . . . and is staying with 
an Order, should not be scurrilous or of loose talk . 1 If, your 
reverences, a monk who is forest-gone . . . and is staying with an 
Order, is scurrilous and of loose talk, there will be those who speak 
about him and say: ‘ What is the good of this venerable one who is 
forest-gone, living alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who is 
scurrilous and of loose talk V — there will be those who speak about 
him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone . . . and is staying with an 
Order should not be scurrilous or of loose talk. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone . . . and is staying with 
an Order, should be of pleasant speech , 2 a friend of the lovely . 2 If, 
•your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone . . . and is staying with 
an Order, is of wrong speech , 3 a friend of the evil , 1 there will be those 
who speak about him and say: ‘ What is the good of this venerable 
one who is forest-gone, living alone in a forest doing as he pleases, 
but who is of wrong speech, a friend of the evil V — there will be those 
who speak about him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone . . . 
and is staying with an Order should be of pleasant speech, a friend 
of the lovely. 

Your reverences, ft monk who is forest-gone should 'be guarded 
as to the doors of his sense-organs. If, your reverences, a monk 
who is forest-gone is not guarded as to the doors of his sense- 
organs, there will be those who speak about him and say : * What 
is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone 

1 Cf. M . i. 32. * See M. i. 43. 

* dubbaca can also mean “ difficult to speak to,” see Fin. ii ; . 

M . i. 43. 



144 


69. Oulissanisutta 


I. 470-472 


in a forest doing as he pleases, [471] hut who is not guarded as 
to the doors of his sense-organs?* — there will be those who speak 
about him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone should be 
guarded as to the doors of his sense-organs. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should be moderate 
in eating. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone is not 
moderate in eating, there will be those who speak about him and say : 
‘ What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as Ke pleases, but who is not moderate in 
eating V — there will be those who speak about him. Therefore a 
monk who is forest-gone should be moderate in eating. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should be intent on 
vigilance. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone is not 
intent on vigilance, there will be those who speak about him and say: 
1 What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who is not intent on 
vigilance V — there will be those who speak about him. Therefore 
a monk who is forest-gone should be intent on vigilance. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should put forth 
energy. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone is lazy, there 
will be those who speak of him and say: * What is the good of this 
venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone in a forest doing as 
he pleases, but who is lazy V — there will be those who speak about 
him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone should put forth energy. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should arouse mind- 
fulness. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone is of muddled 
mindfulness, there will be those who speak about him and say: 
4 What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who is of muddled mind- 
fulness ?*— there will be those who speak about him. Therefore 
a monk who is forest-gone should arouse mindfulness. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should have concen- 
tration. If, your reverences a monk who is forest-gone has not 
concentration, there will be those who speak about him and say: 
4 What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who has not concentration V 
— there will be those who speak about him. Therefore a monk who 
is forest-gone should have concentration. 

Your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone should have wisdom. 
If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone is poor in wisdom, 
there will be those who [472] speak about him and say: 4 What is the 



I. 472 


On Gulissdni 


145 


good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone in a forest 
doing as he pleases, but who is poor in wisdom V — there will be those 
who speak about him. Therefore a monk who is forest-gone should 
have wisdom. 

Your reverences, earnest study 1 in Further-Dhamma, in Further- 
Discipline 2 should be made by a monk who is forest-gone. Your 
reverences, there are those who will question a monk who is forest- 
gone on Further-Dhamma and Further-Discipline. If, your 
reverences, a monk who is forest-gone, on being asked a question on 
Further-Dhamma, on Further-Discipline, does not succeed (in 
answering it), there will be those who speak about him and say: 
‘ What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who, on being asked a 
question on Further-Dhamma, on Further-Discipline, does not 
succeed (in answering it) V — there will be those who speak about him. 
Therefore earnest study should be made in Further-Dhamma, in 
Further-Discipline by a monk who is forest-gone. 

Your reverences, earnest study should be made by a monk who is 
forest-gone concerning those that are the peaceful Deliverances 3 and 
are incorporeal having transcended material shapes. There are, 
your reverences, those who will question a monk who is forest-gone 
about those that are the peaceful Deliverances and are incorporeal 
having transcended material shapes. If, your reverences, a monk 
who is forest-gone, on being asked a question about those that are 
the peaceful Deliverances and are incorporeal having transcended 
material shapes, does not succeed (in answering it), there will be 
those who speak about him and say: 4 What is the good of this 
venerable one who is forest-gone, living alone in a forest doing as he 
pleases, but who, on being asked a question about those that are the 
peaceful Deliverances and are incorporeal having transcended 
material shapes, does not succeed (in answering it) V — there will be 
those who speak about him. Therefore earnest study should be 

1 yoga, earnest application, a closing in on a subject until, in modem 
parlance, you have made it yours, are at one with it, “ yoked ” to it. 

1 abhidhamma abhivinaya ; cf. A. i. 288 ff. MA. iii. 185 takes these as the 
Pitakas; to the former it specially adds the Dhamrnahadayavibkanga ( Vbh. 401). 
See Asl. p. *24 : abhidkamme duppatipanno dhammacittam atidhavanto acinteyydni 
pi cinteti, UUo ciitavikkhepam pdpunati ; translated at Expos . i. 31 : “ The 
bhikkhu who is ill-trained in the Abhidhamma makes his mind run to excess 
in metaphysical abstractions and thinks of the unthinkable. Consequently 
he gets mental distraction/’ 

* See the eight vimokha a* D . ii. 70, 71; also below, p. 152 ff. 




146 


69. Gulissdnisutta 


I. 472-473 


made by a monk who is forest-gone concerning those that are the 
peaceful Deliverances and are incorporeal having transcended 
material shapes. 

Your reverences, earnest study in states of further-men should be 
made by a monk who is forest-gone. There are, your reverences, 
those who will question a monk who is forest-gone about states of 
further-men. If, your reverences, a monk who is forest-gone, on 
being asked a question about states of further-men, does not succeed 
(in answering it), there will be those who speak about him and say: 
* What is the good of this venerable one who is forest-gone, living 
alone in a forest doing as he pleases, but who does not even know the 
goal for the sake of which he has gone forth V — there will be those 
who speak about him. Therefore earnest study in states of further- 
men should be made by a monk who is forest-gone.” 

This said, the venerable Moggallana the Great spoke thus to the 
venerable Sariputta: “ Reverend Sariputta, are these things to be 
taken up and practised only by a monk who is forest-gone or [473] 
also by one staying near a village ?” 

“ These things, reverend Moggallana, are certainly to be taken up 
and practised by a monk who is forest-gone, all the more 1 by one 
staying near a village.” 


Discourse on Gulissani : 
The Ninth 


70. DISCOURSE AT KlTAGIRI 
(Kltagirisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was walking on tour in 
Kasi together with a large Order of monks. While he was there the 
Lord addressed the monks, saying: “ I, monks, do not eat a meal at 
night. Not eating a meal at night, I, monks, am aware of good 
health 2 and of being without illness and of buoyancy and strength 
and living in comfort. Come, do you too, monks, not eat a meal at 

1 pag-e va t also meaning “ mueh less,” and a fortiori. It might here mean 
“ in consequence also,” suggesting that the village dweller should emulate 
the one who practises the austerity, dhutanga, of the forest dweller, since this 
was the original type of austere mode of living. 

> As at M. i. 437. 




I. 473-474 


147 


At Kltagiri 

night. Not eating a meal at night, you too, monks, will be aware of 
good health and of being without illness and of buoyancy and strength 
and living in comfort.” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” these monks answered the Lord in assent. 
Then the Lord, walking on tour in Kasi, in due course arrived at 
Kltagiri, a market town in Kasi. Then the Lord stayed at Kltagiri, 
the market town in Kasi. Now at that time the monks named Assaji 
and Punabbasuka 1 were residing in Kltagiri. Then several monks 
approached the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka ; having approached, 
they spoke thus to them: “ The Lord, your reverences, does not 
eat a meal at night, nor does the Order of monks; and because, your 
reverences, they do not eat a meal at night they are aware of good 
health and of being without illness and of buoyancy and strength 
and living in comfort. Come, do you too, your reverences, not eat 
a meal at night. Not eating a meal at night, you too, your rev- 
erences, will be aware of good health and of being without illness 
and of buoyancy and strength and living in comfort.” [474] When 
this had been said, the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka spoke thus 
to these monks: 

“ We, your reverences, eat in the evening as well as in the morning 
and during the day — at the wrong time. 2 But although we eat in 
the evening as well as in the morning and during the day — at the 
wrong time — we are aware of good health and of being without 
illness and of buoyancy and strength and living in comfort. Why 
should we, giving up the things of the present, 3 run after those of the 
future ? 4 We will eat in the evening as well as in the morning and 
during the day — at the wrong time.” 

So because these monks were unable to convince the monks Assaji 
and Punabbasuka, they approached the Lord; having approached, 
having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a respectful distance. As 
they were sitting down at a respectful distance, these monks spoke 

1 Two of the six sectarian leaders of groups of monks; names of the six 

leaders given at MA. iii. 186-7, Ja. ii. 387. These two, whose headquarters 
were at Kl$5giri, are mentioned at t.g. Vin . ii. 9 ff. f 171, iii. 81, 178 /. See 
B.D. i. 314, ». 2. 

* See M . i. 448 (above, p. 120). 

* sandifthika, what can be seen and realised, a word used in the usual 
deseription of dhamma. 

4 kdlika , involving time, so: not immediate. MA. iii. 187 explains as 
anagate kale paUabbam anisarhsam, advantages t) be obtained at a future 
time. The opposite, akalika, is another word used in the usual description 
of dhamma. 



148 70. KitdgirisvUa I. 474-475 

thus to the Lord : “ Now we, revered sir, approached the monks 
Assaji and Punabbasuka; having approached, we spoke thus to the 
monks Assaji and Punabbasuka: 4 The Lord, your reverences, does 
not eat a meal at night, nor does the Order of monks . . . and living 
in comfort/ When this had been said, revered sir, the monks Assaji 
and Punabbasuka spoke thus to us : ‘ We, your reverences, eat in the 
evening ... at the wrong time/ It is because we, revered sir, were 
not able to convince the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka that we are 
telling this matter to the Lord.” 

Then the Lord summoned a certain monk, saying: “ Come you, 
monk, in my name summon the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka, 
saying: ‘ The Teacher is summoning the venerable ones/ ” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” and this monk, having answered the Lord in 
assent, approached the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka; having 
approached, he spoke thus to the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka : 
" The Teacher is summoning the venerable ones.” 

“ Yes, your reverence,” and the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka, 
having answered that monk in assent, approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a respectful 
distance. As they were sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
Lord spoke thus to the monks Assaji and Punabbasuka: 

“ Is it true, as is said, monks, that several monks, having approached 
you, spoke thus: * The Lord, your reverences, does not eat a meal at 
night, nor does the Order of monks; and because, your reverences, 
they do not eat a meal at night they are aware of good health and of 
being without illness and of buoyancy and strength and living in 
comfort. Come, do you too, your reverences, not eat a meal at 
night. Not eating a meal at night, you too, your reverences, [475] 
will be aware of good health . . . and living in comfort/ It is said 
that when this had been said, monks, you spoke thus to those monks : 

* We, your reverences, eat in the evening as well as in the morning 
and during the day — at the wrong time. But although we eat in the 
evening as well as in the morning and during the day— at the wrong 
time — we are aware of good health and of being without illness and 
of buoyancy and strength and living in comfort. Why should we, 
giving up the things of the present, run after those of the future ? 
We will eat in the evening as well as in the morning and during the 
day — at the wrong time/ ” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ Did you, monks, ever understand that dhamma was taught thus 
by me: Whatever an individual experiences — be it pleasant or 



I. 475-476 At Rtidgiri 149 

painful or neither painful nor pleasant — unskilled states decline in 
him, skilled states grow much ?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ Did not you, monks, understand that dkamma was taught thus 
by me: For anyone here feeling a pleasant feeling of one kind 1 
unskilled states 2 grow much, skilled states decline, but for anyone 
here feeling a pleasant feeling of another kind 1 unskilled states decline, 
skilled states grow much ; for anyone here feeling a painful feeling of 
one kind unskilled states grow much, skilled states decline, but for 
anyone here feeling a painful feeling of another kind unskilled states 
decline, skilled states grow much; for anyone here feeling a feeling 
that is neither painful nor pleasant of one kind unskilled states grow 
much, skilled states decline, but for anyone here feeling a feeling that 
is neither painful nor pleasant of another kind unskilled states 
decline, skilled states grow much.” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ It is good, monks. If this, monks, had not been understood by 
me, if it had not been seen, known, realised, apprehended by means 
of wisdom that: For anyone here feeling a pleasant feeling of one 
kind unskilled states grow much, skilled states decline — could I, 
monks, not understanding it thus, say: Get rid of pleasant feeling of 
this kind 3 4 — and would this have been suitable in me, monks ?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 

" But, monks, since this has been understood by me, seen, known, 
realised and apprehended by means of wisdom that: For anyone 
here feeling a pleasant feeling of one kind unskilled [ 476 ] states grow 
much, skilled states decline — therefore I say: Get rid of pleasant 
feeling of this kind. 

And if this, monks, had not been understood by me, if it had not 
been seen, known, realised, apprehended by means of wisdom that; 
For anyone here feeling a pleasant feeling of another kind unskilled 
states decline, skilled states grow much— could I, monks, not under- 
standing it thus, say: Entering on pleasant feeling of this (other) 
kind,* abide in it— and would this have been suitable in me, 
monks ?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 


1 evarupa . 1 dkamma , 

* Reference is here being made to the six types of pleasure of the worldly 

life; c/. 3. iv. 232; Vbh, 381. 

4 The pleasant states not to be got rid of are the six ways of getting pleasure 
through renunciation, S. iv. 232. 




160 70, Kltdgirisutta I. 476-477 

“ But, monks, since this has been understood by me, seen, known, 
realised and apprehended by means of wisdom that: For anyone 
here feeling a pleasant feeling of this other kind unskilled states 
decline, skilled states grow much— therefore I say: Entering on 
pleasant feeling of this (other) kind, abide in it. 

And if this, monks, had not been understood by me, if it had not 
been seen, known, realised, apprehended by means of wisdom that: 
For anyone here feeling a painful feeling of one kind ... a feeling that 
is neither painful nor pleasant of one kind unskilled states grow much, 
skilled states decline — could I, monks, not understanding it thus, 
say: Get rid of feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant of this 
kind — and would this have been suitable in me, monks ? 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ But, monks, since this has been understood by me, seen, known, 
realised and apprehended by means of wisdom that: For anyone 
here feeling a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant of this kind 
unskilled states grow much, skilled states decline— therefore I say: 
Get rid of feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant of this kind. 

And if this, monks, had not been understood by me, if it had not 
been seen, known, realised, apprehended by means of wisdom that: 
For anyone here feeling a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant 
of another kind unskilled states decline, skilled states grow much — 
could I, monks, not understanding it thus, say: Entering on a feeling 
that is neither painful nor pleasant of this other kind, abide in it — 
and would this have been suitable in me V* 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ But, monks, since this has been understood by me, seen, known, 
realised and apprehended by means of wisdom that: For anyone 
here feeling a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant of this other 
kind, unskilled states decline, skilled Btates grow much — therefore 
I say [477] : Entering on a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant 
of this (other) kind, abide in it. 

I, monks, do not say of all monks that there is something to be 
done through diligence; yet, I, monks, do not say of all monks that 
there is not something to be done through diligence. Monks, those 
monks who are perfected ones, canker-waned, who have lived the 
life, done what there was to be done, laid down the burden, who have 
attained their own goal, the fetters of becoming utterly destroyed, 
who are freed by right profound knowledge, of monks such as these 
I do not say, monks, that there is something to be done through 
diligence. What is the reason for this ? It has (already) been done 



I. 477 At Kitdgiri 151 

by these through diligence, these could not become negligent. But, 
monks, those monks who are learners, not attained to perfection, 1 
but who live striving for the incomparable security from the bonds, 
of monks such as these I say, monks, that there is something to be 
done through diligence. What is the reason for this ? Even while 
these venerable ones are resorting to suitable lodgings, associating 
with lovely friends, and are themselves controlling their sense-organs, 
having realised here and now by their own super-knowledge that 
matchless goal of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men 
of family rightly go forth from home into homelessness, entering on 
it, they could abide in it. So I, monks, beholding this fruit of 
diligence for these monks, say that there is something to be done 
through diligence. 

Monks, there are the seven (types of) persons existing in the world. 
What seven ? 2 The one who is freed both ways, the one freed by 
means of intuitive wisdom, the mental realiser, the one won to view, 
the one freed by faith, the striver after dhamma, the striver after faith. 

And which, monks, is the person who is freed both ways I s As to 
this, monks, some person is abiding, having apprehended 4 with the 


1 As at if . i. 4. 

* As at if. i, 439. Cf. Vim . 059 where these seven “ ariyan persons ” 
are given in a different order. 

* ubhatobkagavimutta. Cf. if, i. 439: D. ii. 71; A. i. 74, iv. 453; Pug. 14, 
72, 73. At MA . iii. 188, DA . ii. 514, iii. 889 it is said that he is freed rupa- 
kayato (from the body, or, class, kdya—nikdya, of material shape, i.e. body) 
through the incorporeal attainments, and ndmakdyato (from the class of mind, 
mental aggregates) through the Way. This kind of freedom is therefore from 
ndtna and rupa , also the view of SnA. ii. 594, AA. iv. 207. It does not mean 
“ freed through heart and intellect ” as sometimes stated, e.g. Fur . DM. 
i. 313. MA. iii. 188, DA. iii. 889 say: emerging one by one from the four 
incorporeal attainments, having mastered the (volitional) activities ( aankh&rdi 
of body, speech and thought), emerging from the cessation of the four attain- 
ments of arahantship, he has attained arahantship and is a non-returner — 
in this way it is fivefold. DA. ii. 514 says: emerging from the planes of 

infinite ether and so on, he has attained arahantship and is a non-returner, 
and emerging from cessation he has attained arahantship. It is fivefold- 
DA. ii. 514 also cites Sn. 1074, which speaks of nama-kfrya-vimutto, freed 
from the class of “ name ” (mind), or, freed from name and body T This 
explanation, attributed to Cula-Sumana, an Elder of Ceylon, and recorded 
at DA. ii. 514, is supposed to be the most authoritative interpretation. 

4 phassitvd , with v. 11. phuaUva, phusaiivd; at MA. i. 162 it is said ndma- 
kdyena phuaitvd ; papunitvd adhigantvd ti vuttam hoti, having apprehended 
with (through, or while in) the psycho-physical compound (taking haya as 
equal to rupa), having mastered, having won. Cf. A. ii. 87, etc. 




152 70. KUdgiriaulta I. 477-478 

person 1 those peaceful Deliverances 2 which are incorporeal 3 having 
transcended material shapes; 4 and having seen by means of wisdom 
his cankers are utterly destroyed. This, monks, is called the person 
who is freed both ways. I, monks, do not say of this monk that 
there is something to be done through diligence. What is the reason 
for this 1 It has been done by him through diligence, he could not 
become negligent. 

And which, monks, is the person who is freed by means of intuitive 
wisdom ? As to this, monks, some person is abiding without having 
apprehended with the person those peaceful Deliverances which are 
incorporeal having transcended material shapes; yet, having seen by 
means of wisdom his cankers are utterly destroyed. 5 This, monks, 
is called [478] the person who is freed by means of intuitive wisdom. 
I, monks, do not say of this monk that there is something to be done 
through diligence. What is the reason for this ? It has been done 
by him through diligence, he could not become negligent. 

And which, monks, is the person who is a mental-realiser ? s As to 
this, monks, some person is abiding, having apprehended with the 
person those peaceful Deliverances which are incorporeal having 
transcended material shapes; and having seen by means of wisdom 
some (only) of his cankers are utterly destroyed. This, monks, is 
called the person who is a mental-realiser, I, monks, say of this 
monk that there is something to be done through diligence. What is 

* kdyena, which would appear to mean the rupakdya and the namakaya, 
Bee p. 151, n. 3 above, and 8nA. ii. 594. 

* These number eight, see D. ii. 70-71. At MA. i. 162 it is said that 
“ peaceful ” (or “ calm,” santa) is because there is peace in regard to the 
factors, ahga, as well as in regard to the object of meditation; while vimokkha 
means freed from opposing dhamma and intent on the object of meditation 
or thought. 

* In respect of the object of thought and resultant (thought) they are devoid 
of material shapes, MA. i. 162. 

4 Having transcended (or, passed beyond) in the jhana on material spheres, 
MA. i. 162. 

* Pug. 14, 73; quoted at MA. iii. 188, DA. ii. 512; cf. A. iv. 453. 

* kdyamkkhin . See M. i. 439, Pug . 14, 73. At MA. iii. 189 it is said that 
he realises that which Is apprehended; whoever first realises a jhana- realisa- 
tion afterwards realises stopping, nibbana. So, having begun with stream- 
attainment, he goes on to arahantship. Cf. A . iv. 461 and AA. iv. 206 which 
says “ because the first jhdna is realised by means of this ndmakdya, therefore 
in this way (pariydyena) he is called a kdyamkkhin For kdya meaning the 
three mental factors (presumably referring to the khandhas of feeling, per- 
ception and the sanJchdras , as at Dhs. 40) see P. Purity, 806, n. 2, and Expos. 
i. 199. 



I. 478-479 


153 


At Kxidgiri 

the reason for this ? Even while this venerable one is resorting to 
suitable lodgings, associating with lovely friends, and is himself 
controlling his sense-organs, having realised here and now by his 
own super-knowledge that matchless goal of the Brahma-faring for 
the sake of which young men of family rightly go forth from home 
into homelessness, entering on it he might abide in it. So I, monks, 
beholding this fruit of diligence for this monk, say that there is 
something to be done through diligence. 

And which, monks, is the person who has won to view ? l As to 
this, monks, some person is abiding without having apprehended with 
the person those peaceful Deliverances which are incorporeal having 
transcended material shapes; yet, having seen by means of wisdom 
some of his cankers are utterly destroyed, and those things pro- 
claimed by the Tathagata are fully seen by him through intuitive 
wisdom and fully practised. 2 * This, monks, is called the person who 
has won to view. I, monks, say of this monk that there is something 
to be done through diligence. What is the reason for this ? Even 
while this venerable one is resorting to suitable lodgings ... he might 
abide in it. So I, monks, beholding this fruit of diligence for this 
monk, say that there is something to be done through diligence. 

And which, monks, is the person who is freed by faith ? 8 As to 
this, monks, some person is abiding without having apprehended 
with the person those peaceful Deliverances which are incorporeal 
having transcended material shapes; yet, having seen by means of 
wisdom some of his cankers are utterly destroyed, and his faith in the 
Tathagata is settled, genuine, established. 4 * This, monks, is called 
the person who is freed through faith. I, monks, say of this monk 
that there is something to be done through diligence. What is the 
reason for this ? Even while this venerable one is resorting to 
suitable [479] lodgings . . . entering on it he might abide in it. So I, 
monks, beholding this fruit of diligence for this monk, say that there 
is something to be done through diligence. 

And which, monks, is the person who is striving for dhamma ? 6 * 

1 ditfkipaUa. MA. iii. 189 quotes M. ii. 38 —Pug. 16=43 ff. which are all 

passages that speak of comprehending the four Truths of anguish as they 
really are. 1 Pug. 16. See A. iv. 363 on the power, bala , of wisdom. 

* See Sn. 1146: by faith you shall be free. 

4 Pug. 16 differs, giving the same interpretation for this person as for the 

preceding, while saying that they differ. 

• dhammanusarin. Pug. 16 again differs. Cf. M. i. 142; 8. iii. 226, 228. 

He and the next are stream -attainers. MA. iii. 190=2X4. 890 says dkamtno 

ti patina, dhamma is wisdom. 



154 


I. 479-480 


70. KUdgiriautta 

As to this, monks, some person is abiding without having appre- 
hended with the person those peaceful Deliverances which are 
incorporeal having transcended material shapes; but (although) he 
has seen by means of wisdom, his cankers are not (yet) utterly 
destroyed ; and those things proclaimed by the Tathagata are (only) 
moderately approved of 1 by him by means of intuitive wisdom, 
although he has these states, namely the faculty of faith, the faculty 
of energy, the faculty of mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, 
the faculty of wisdom.* This, monks, is called the person who is 
striving for dhamma. I, monks, say of this monk that there is 
something to be done through diligence . What is the reason for this ? 
Even while this venerable one is resorting to suitable lodgings . . . 
entering on it he might abide in it. So I, monks, beholding this 
fruit of diligence for this monk, say that there is something to be 
done through diligence. 

And which, monks, is the person striving after faith ? 3 As to this, 
monks, some person is abiding without having apprehended with the 
person those peaceful Deliverances which are incorporeal having 
transcended material shapes ; yet, having seen by means of wisdom 
his cankers are not utterly destroyed; but if he has enough faith in 
the Tathagata, enough regard, 4 then he will have these things, 
that is to say the faculty of faith, the faculty of energy, the faculty of 
mindfulness, the faculty of concentration, the faculty of wisdom. 
This, monks, is called the person who is striving after faith. I, 
monks, say of this monk that there is something to be done through 
diligence. What is the reason for this ? Even while this venerable 
one is resorting to suitable lodgings, associating with lovely friends, 
and is himself controlling his sense-organs, having realised here and 
now through his own super-knowledge that matchless goal of the 
Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men of family rightly go 
forth from home into homelessness, entering on it he might abide in 
it. So I, monks, beholding this fruit of diligence for this monk, say 
that there is something to be done through diligence. 

I, monks, do not say that the attainment of profound knowledge 
comes straightaway; nevertheless, monks, the attainment of pro- 
found knowledge comes by a gradual training, a gradual doing, a 
gradual course. [ 480 ] And how, monks, does the attainment of 
profound knowledge come by means of a gradual training, a gradual 


1 Matiaso nijjhdnam khamanti ; cf. 8 . iii. 228, v. 377; A . iv. 241. 

* On these five faculties, or cardinal virtues, see S . v. 199. 

• Pug. 15 differs. Cf. M. i. 142. 4 Cf. 8. v. 377. 



I. 480 


155 


At Kltdgiri 

doing, a gradual course ? As to this, monks, one who has faith draws 
close; 1 * drawing close, he sits down near by;* sitting down near by he 
lends ear; lending ear he hears dhamma ; having heard dhamma he 
remembers it; he tests the meaning of the things he has borne in 
mind; while testing the meaning the things are approved of; there 
being approval of the things desire 3 is bom; with desire bom he 
makes an effort; having made the effort he weighs it up; having 
weighed it up he strives; being self-resolute he realises with his 
person the highest truth itself and, penetrating it by means of wisdom, 
he sees. 4 * But, monks, had there not been that faith, there would 
not have been, monks, that drawing close ; there would not have been, 
monks, that sitting down near by; there would not have been, monks, 
that lending ear; there would not have been, monks, that hearing of 
dhamma; there would not have been, monks, that remembering of 
dhamma; there would not have been, monks, that testing of the 
meaning; there would not have been, monks, that approval of the 
things; there would not have been, monks, that desire; there would 
not have been, monks, that effort ; there would not have been, monks, 
that striving. Monks, you are on a wrong track, you are on a false 
track, monks. How very far, monks, have not these foolish persons 
strayed from this dhamma and discipline. 

There is a fourfold exposition, monks, the meaning of which, when 
it is recited, an intelligent man could soon understand by means of 
wisdom. I will recite it to you, monks, you will understand it from 

99 

me. 

“ Who are we, revered sir, and who are the knowers of dhamma V 9 

“ Monks, even a teacher who sets store on material things, 6 * * is an 
heir to material things, and lives in association with material things — 
why, even to him, this kind of higgling and haggling does not apply, 


1 MA. iii. 193 says that “ he goes near (or, into the presence of) a teacher.” 
The following passage also occurs at M. ii. 173. 

* payirupasati , can also mean to pay respects to someone, to visit someone. 
MA, iii. 193=42$ says “ he sits down in the presence of,” santike. Cf. A A. 
ii. 196. 

* chanda. MA . iii. 193 calls this desire for what is skilled, kusalachanda. 

4 Of. A. ii.*116. At MA . iii. 193 it is said that “ he realises the truth of 

nibb&na ndmakdyena , by means of the class of name; and that ( by means of 

wisdom * means he sees, having pierced by means of the wisdom of the Way 

which is connected with ndmakaya .” Kdyena , “with the person”, would 

seem to mean the very opposite of “ through the medium of his bodily 
senses ” as at Fur . Dial . i. 338. 

4 That is, a teacher who is “ outside ” the Buddhist fold. 




156 


I. 480-481 


70. KUdgiriautta 

that (his followers) will or will not do this or that according as they 
like it or not. So what has this to do with the Tathagata who lives 
dissociated from material things ? For a disciple who has faith 
in the Teacher’s instruction and lives in unison with it, monks, it is a 
principle 1 that: ‘ The Teacher is the Lord, a disciple am I; the 
Lord knows, I do not know.’ 2 For a disciple who has faith in the 
Teacher’s instruction and lives in unison with it, monks, the 
Teacher’s instruction is a furthering in growth, 3 giving strength. 4 
For a disciple who has faith in the Teachers instruction and lives in 
unison with it, monks, [481] it is a principle that : i Gladly 5 * * would I 
be reduced to skin and sinews and bone and let my body’s flesh and 
blood 8 dry up if there came to be a vortex of energy so that that 
which is not (yet) won might be won by human strength, by human 
energy, by human striving.’ For a disciple who has faith in the 
Teacher’s instruction and lives in unison with it, monks, one of two 
fruits is to be expected: profound knowledge here and now, or, if 
there is any basis (for rebirth remaining), the state of no-retum.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 

Discourse at Kltagiri: 

The Tenth 

Division on Monks: 

The Second 

1 anudhamma , a (right) method; in accordance with dhamma. 

* Here, according to MA. iii. 194: “ The Lord knows the advantages in 
eating only once a day; I do not. But, because of my faith, I will eat only 
one meal a day, giving up eating three times daiiy. r; 

• rumhaniya . 4 ojavant ; MA. iii. 194 says sinehavant. 

4 As at A. i. 50; 3. ii. 28. 

4 MA. iii. 194 says that thus the application to the skin, sinews, bones, 

and the flesh and blood constitutes a fourfold energy. But the “ fourfold 

exposition ” is more likely to refer to the disciple who has faith. Nor is there 

anything here about the four truths ( MA . iii. 193). 




III. THE DIVISION ON WANDERERS 

(Paribbajakavagga) 




71. DISCOURSE TO VACCHAGOTTA ON THE 
THREEFOLD KNOWLEDGE 

(Tevijja-Vacchagottasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Vesali 
in the Great Grove in the hall of the Gabled House. Now at that 
time the wanderer Vacchagotta 1 was living in Ekapundarika, 2 
the wanderers’ park. Then the Lord, having dressed in the morning, 
taking his bowl and robe, entered Vesali for almsfood. But it 
occurred to the Lord: “ It is still too early to walk for almsfood 
in Vesali. Suppose I were to approach Ekapundarlka, the wan- 
derers* park, and Vacchagotta the wanderer t” Then the Lord 
approached Ekapui>darlka, the wanderers’ park, and Vaccha- 
gotta the wanderer. The wanderer Vacchagotta saw the Lord 
coming in the distance and seeing him, he spoke thus to the Lord : 
“ Revered sir, let the Lord come ; revered sir, there is a welcome for 
the Lord; revered sir, it is long since the Lord made the opportunity 
to come here ; revered sir, let the Lord sit down, this is the appointed 
seat.” The Lord sat down on the appointed seat, and Vacchagotta 
the wanderer, [482] having taken a low seat, sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the wan- 
derer Vacchagotta spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ Revered sir, I have heard: The recluse Gotama is all knowing, 3 
all seeing; he claims all-embracing knowledge-and- vision, saying: 
‘ Whether I am walking or standing still or asleep or awake, 
knowledge-and- vision is permanently and continuously before me.* 
Revered sir, those who speak thus : The recluse Gotama is all knowing, 
all seeing; he claims all-embracing knowledge-and -vision, saying: 


1 Cf. A . i. 160; 8. iii. 26 1 ff. t iv. 391 ff. Verses are ascribed to him at 
Thag. 112. His spiritual evolution is told in this and the two following 
Discourses, and very briefly at Thag A. i. 236. 

* MA . iii. 195=1X4. ii. 416 says purulartka is a white mango tree. A 
solitary one (eka) grew in this wanderers' park. This park is not to be con- 
fused with the ekapundarlka uyyana of M. i. 262. 

• Said of NStaputta at 3/. i. 92-93. 

169 




160 


I. 482-483 


71. T evijja-V dcchagottasutta 

‘ Whether I am walking or standing still or asleep or awake, know- 
ledge-and-vision is permanently and continuously before me f — 
revered sir, I hope that these 1 are speaking of the Lord in accordance 
with what has been said and are not misrepresenting the Lord with 
what is not fact, but are explaining in accordance with dhamma , and 
that no one of his fellow dhamma-men, of this way of speaking, gives 
grounds for reproach ?” 

“ Vaccha, those who speak thus: the recluse Gotama is all 
knowing, all seeing; he claims all-embracing knowledge-and-vision, 
saying: ‘ Whether I am walking or standing still or asleep or awake, 
knowledge-and-vision is permanently and continuously before me * — 
these are not speaking of me in accordance with what has been 
said, but they are misrepresenting me with what is untrue, not 
fact.” 

“ Expounding in what way, revered sir, would we be speaking in 
accordance with what has been said, and would not be misrepresen- 
ting the Lord with what is not fact, but would be explaining in 
accordance with dhamma so that no fellow dhamma-m&n, of the same 
way of speaking, could give grounds for reproach V* 

“Vaccha, expounding: ‘The recluse Gotama is a threefold- 
knowledge man/ you would be one who speaks in accordance with 
what has been said by me, you would not be misrepresenting me 
with what is not fact, you would be explaining in accordance with 
dhamma t and no fellow dhamma-m an of this way of speaking could 
give grounds for reproach. For I, Vaccha, whenever I please 
recollect a variety of former habitations, that is to say one birth, 
two births . . . 8 thus do I recollect divers former habitations in all 
their modes and details. And I, Vaccha, whenever I please, with 
the purified deva-vision surpassing that of men ... see beings as they 
pass hence and come to be; I comprehend that beings are mean, 
excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going according to the con- 
sequences of deeds. And I, Vaccha, by the destruction of the 
cankers, having realised here and now by my own super-knowledge 
the freedom of mind and the freedom through wisdom that are 
cankerless, entering thereon, abide therein. Vaccha, expounding 
that the recluse Gotama is a threefold-knowledge man, [483] you 
would be one who speaks in accordance with what has been said 
by me, you would not be misrepresenting me with what is not fact, 
you would be explaining in accordance with dhamma , and no 


1 Cf, A. i. 161, ii. 31, iii. 4; S. ii. 33, 36, iii. 6. 


• Cf . M . i. 22. 




I. 483 To Vacehagotta on the Threefold Knowledge 161 

fellow dkamma - man of this way of speaking could give grounds for 
reproach.” 

When this had been said, Vacehagotta the wanderer spoke thus to 
the Lord : 

“ Good Gotama, is there any householder who, not getting rid of 
the householder's fetter(s), 1 at the breaking up of the body is an 
end-maker of ill ?” 

“ There is not any householder, Vaccha, who, not getting rid of the 
householder's fetter(s), at the breaking up of the body is an end- 
maker of ill.” 

“ But is there, good Gotama, any householder who, not getting 
rid of the householder's fetter(s), at the breaking up of the body 
attains heaven V* 

“ Not just one hundred, Vaccha, nor two hundred, nor three, four 
or five hundred, but far more are those householders who, not getting 
rid of the householder’s fetter(s), at the breaking up of the body 
attain heaven.” 

“ Now, good Gotama, is there any Naked Ascetic who at the 
breaking up of the body iB an end-maker of ill ?” 

“ There is not, Vaccha, any Naked Ascetic who at the breaking up 
of the body is an end-maker of ill.” 

“ But is there then, good Gotama, any Naked Ascetic who at the 
breaking up of the body attained heaven ?” 

“ Although I, Vaccha, recollect ninety-one eons, 2 1 do not know of 
any Naked Ascetic who attained heaven, except one; and Ac professed 
kamma , he professed operative kamma” z 


1 Probably meaning his wife, children and servants. 

* At D . ii. 2 Gotama is reputed to say that the Buddha Vipassin arose in 
the world ninety-one eons, kappa , ago. This context mentions six Buddhas 
preceding Gotama; of these Vipassin is the first. I suggest that our M. 
passage may have a hidden reference to the fact that Gotama’s recollection 
of his previous lives, or “ habitations,” goes back to Vipassin *s time; and that, 
since from D. ii. 2 and M . i. 483 it does not appear to go back to the times of 

the other Buddhas who preceded Vipassin, is perhaps contributory evidence 
that the number of these was of later growth ; see e.g. E, J, Thomas, Life, of 
Buddha , p. 27. See Intr. p. xvii. 

3 so p'dsi kammavddi kirtyavddi. MA. iii, 196 says that if he was the 
former he -could not avoid being the latter. A. L. Basham, Hist, of the 
Ajivikas , p. 135 says he was in consequence of these views “not an orthodox 
follower of Makkhali Gosala.” Cf. Vin. i. 71: kammavddino etc kiriyavddino , 
said of the matted hair ascetics who, for this very reason, were to be privileged 
not to undergo the prescribed four months' probation for members of other 
sects before they were ordained as monks. Cf. also A , i. 287* 




162 71. Tevijja-V aechagotta&utta, I. 483-484 

“ This being so, good Gotama, that fold of the sectsHs empty even 
in regard to attaining heaven.” 

“ This being so, Yaccha, that fold of the sects is empty even in 
regard to attaining heaven.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the wanderer Vacchagotta 
rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse to Vacchagotta on the Threefold Knowledge: 

The First 


72. DISCOURSE TO VACCHAGOTTA ON FIRE 

(Aggi-Vacchagottasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Savatthf 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapiodika’s monastery. Then the wan- 
derer Vacchagotta approached the Lord; [484] having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord; having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the wanderer 
Vacchagotta spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ Now, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 1 * * 4 The 
world is eternal, 2 this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood’ ? ” 
“ I, Vaccha, am not of this view: 4 The world is eternal, this is 
indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

“ Then good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: ‘ The 
world is not eternal, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood’ 1 ” 
“ I, Vaccha, am not of this view: * The world is not eternal, this is 
indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

“ Now, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: * The 
world is an ending thing, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood’?” 

“ I, Vaccha, am not of this view: ‘ The world is an ending thing, 
this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

1 tiithayatana , as at Fin. i. 60, 69, ii. 279, iv. 217; A. i. 173. See 2LD. 

iii. 167, n. 2. 

* Cf. 3. iv. 391 ff.y where Vacchagotta is recorded to put all the following 

questions to Moggallana; c/. S. iii. 257 ff. 



I. 484-485 To Vacchagotta on Fire 163 

44 Then, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 4 The 
world is not an ending thing, this is indeed the truth, all else is 
falsehood’ ? ” 

44 I, Vaecha, am not of this view : * The world is not an ending thing, 
this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

44 Now, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: * The 
life-principle and the body are the same, this is indeed the truth, all 
else is falsehood’ ? ” 

44 I, Vaccha, am not of this view: 4 The life-principle and the body 
are the same, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

44 Then, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 4 The 
life-principle is one thing, the body another, this is indeed the truth, 
all else is falsehood’ ? ” 

44 I, Vaccha, am not of this view: 4 The life-principle is one thing, 
the body another, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

44 Now, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: * The 
Tathagata is after dying, this is indeed the truth, all else is false- 
hood’ ? ” 

44 I, Vaccha, am not of this view: * The Tathagata is after dying, 
this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

44 Then, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 4 The 
Tathagata is not after dying, this is indeed the truth, all else is 
falsehood’ ? ” 

“ I, Vaccha, am not of this view : 4 The Tathagata is not after dying 
. . . falsehood.’ ” 

44 Now, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 4 The 
Tathagata both is and is not after dying, this is indeed the truth, all 
else is falsehood’ ? ” 

[485] 44 1, Vaccha, am not of this view : 4 The Tathagata both is and 
is not after dying . . . falsehood.’ ” 

44 Then, good Gotama, is the revered Gotama of this view: 4 The 
Tathagata neither is nor is not after dying, this is indeed the truth, 
all else is falsehood’ ? ” 

44 1, Vaccha, am not of this view: 1 The Tathagata neither is nor is 
not after dying, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.’ ” 

44 Now, good Gotama, the revered Gotama, on being asked whether 
he is of the view: 4 The world is eternal, this is indeed the truth, all 
else is falsehood.’ says: 4 1, Vaccha, am not of this view: The world 
is eternal ... all else is falsehood.’ But, good Gotama, the revered 
Gotama, on being asked whether he is of the view: 4 The world is not 
eternal on being asked whether ho is of the view: 4 The 



164 72, Aggi-V (icehagottosutta I. 486-486 

Tathagata both is and is not after dying on being asked 

whether he is of the view: * The Tathagata neither is nor is not after 
dying, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood,* says: ‘I, 
Vaccha, am not of the view: The Tathagata neither is nor is not 
after dying, this is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood.* What is 
the peril the revered Gotama beholds that he thus does not approach 
any of these (speculative) views V* 

“ Vaccha, to think that * the world is eternal* — this is going to a 
(speculative) view, 1 holding a view, the wilds of views, the wriggling 
of views, the scuffling of views, the fetter of views; it is accompanied 
by anguish, distress, misery, fever; it does not conduce to turning 
away from, nor to dispassion, stopping, calming, super-knowledge, 
awakening, nor to nibbana. Vaccha, to think that 1 * the world is not 
eternal’ ... to think that * the world is an ending thing * ... to think 
that ‘ the world is not an ending thing * ... to think that * the life- 
principle and the body are the same * ... to think that 1 the life- 
principle is one thing, the body another ' to think that * the 
Tathagata is after dying * . . . [488] to think that * the Tathagata is 
not after dying * ... to think that 4 the Tathagata both is and is not 
after dying * ... to think that * the Tathagata neither is nor is not 
after dying ’—this, Vaccha, is going to a (speculative) view, holding 
a view, the wilds of views, the wriggling of views, the scuffling of 
views, the fetter of views; it is accompanied by anguish, distress, 
misery, fever; it does not conduce to turning away from, nor to 
dispassion, stopping, calming, super-knowledge, awakening, nor to 
nibbana. I, Vaccha, beholding that this is a peril, thus do not 
approach any of these (speculative) views.” 

“ But does the good Gotama have any (speculative) view 1” 

“ Vaccha, going to * speculative view ’—this has been got rid of by 
the Tathagata. But this, Vaccha, has been seen by the Tathagata: 
* Such is material shape, such is the arising of material shape, such 
the going down of material shape ; such is feeling . , . perception . . . 
such are the habitual tendencies . , . such is consciousness, such is the 
arising of consciousness, such the going down of consciousness.’ 
Therefore I say that by the destruction, dispassion, stopping, giving 
up, casting out of all imaginings, 2 all supposings, all latent pride that 

1 Cj . M. i. 8, 431. Since the Tathagata knows and comprehends, he does 

not hold any speculative view; see below. In this paragraph I have mostly 

translated di#hi as view, but speculative view is meant. 

1 mannita . MA . ill. 198 gives three: craving, false views, pride, as does 
SA, ii. 363. Vbh . 390 gives nine. Cf, S. iv. 21-22. 



I. 486-487 To Vacchagotta on Fire 165 

‘ I am the doer, mine is the doer,’ a Tathagata is freed without 
clinging.” 

“ But, good Gotama, where does a monk arise whose mind is freed 
thus ?” 

Arise,’ Vaccha, does not apply.” 

“ Well then, good Gotama, does he not arise ? ” 

“ * Does not arise,’ Vaccha, does not apply.” 

“ Well then, good Gotama, does he both arise and not arise ?” 

Both arises and does not arise,’ Vaccha, does not apply.” 

“Well then, good Gotama, does he neither arise nor not arise ?” 

“ * Neither arises nor does not arise,’ Vaccha, does not apply.” 

“ But, good Gotama, on being asked where does a monk arise, 
whose mind is freed thus, you say: ‘ “Arise,” Vaccha, does not 
apply.’ Well then, good Gotama, on being asked if he does not arise, 
you say: ‘ “ Does not arise,” Vaccha, does not apply.’ Well then, 
good Gotama, on being asked whether he both arises and does not 
arise, you say : * “ Arises and does not arise,” Vaccha, does not apply.* 
Well then, good Gotama, on being asked whether he neither arises 
nor does not arise, you say: * “ Neither arises nor does not arise,” 
Vaccha, does not apply.’ [487] I am at a loss on this point, good 
Gotama, I am bewildered, and that measure of satisfaction I had 
from former conversation with the good Gotama — even that have I 
now lost.” 

“ You ought to be at a loss, Vaccha, you ought to be bewildered. 
For, Vaccha, this dhamma is deep, difficult to see, difficult to under- 
stand, peaceful, excellent, beyond dialectic, subtle, intelligible to the 
wise; but it is hard for you who are of another view, another 
allegiance, another objective, of a different observance, and under a 
different teacher. 1 Well then, Vaccha, I will now question you in 
return. Answer as it pleases you. What do you think about this, 
Vaccha ? If a fire were blazing in front of you would you know: 
This fire is blazing in front of me ?” 

“ Good Gotama, if a fire were blazing in front of me I should know : 
This fire is blazing in front of me. M 

“ But if, Vaccha, someone were to question you thus: This fire 
that is blazing in front of you — what is the reason that this fire is 
blazing ? — what would you, Vaccha, reply when questioned thus ?” 

“ If, good Gotama, someone were to question me thus: This fire 
that is blazing in front of you — what is the reason that this fire is 


1 As at if. ii. 43; 2>. i. 87, iii. 36. 



166 


I. 487-488 


72. Aggi- V acchagottasutta 

blazing- ? — I, good Gotama, on being questioned thus would reply 
thus: This fire that is blazing in front of me — this fire is blazing 
because of a supply 1 * of grass and sticks.” 

“ If that fire that was in front of you, Vaccha, were to be quenched, 8 
would you know : This fire that was in front of me has been quenched ? ” 

“ If, good Gotama, that fire that was in front of me were to be 
quenched, I would know: This fire that was in front of me has been 
quenched.” 

“ But if someone were to question you thus, Vaccha: That fire 
that was in front of you and that has been quenched — to which 
direction has that fire gone from here, to the east or west or north 
or south ? On being questioned thus, what would you, Vaccha, 
reply ?” 

“ It does not apply, good Gotama. For, good Gotama, that fire 
blazed because of a supply of grass and sticks, yet from having 
totally consumed this and from the lack of other fuel, being without 
fuel it is reckoned to be quenched.” 

“ Even so, Vaccha, that material shape by which one recognising 
the Tathagata might recognise him — that material shape has been 
got rid of by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm-tree 
stump that can come to no further existence and is not liable to arise 
again in the future. Freed from denotation by material shape is the 
Tathagata, Vaccha, he is deep, immeasurable, unfathomable as is the 
great ocean. * Arises 9 does not apply, ‘ does not arise ’ does not 
apply, [ 488 ] ‘ both arises and does not arise 9 does not apply/ neither 
arises nor does not arise ’ does not apply. That feeling . . . That 
perception . . . Those habitual tendencies . . . That consciousness by 
which one recognising the Tathagata might recognise him — that con- 
sciousness has been got rid of by the Tathagata, cut off at the root, 
made like a palm-tree stump that can come to no further existence and 
is not liable to arise again in the future. Freed from denotation by 
consciousness is the Tathagata, Vaccha, he is deep, immeasurable, 
unfathomable as is the great ocean. ‘ Arises 9 does not apply, ‘ does 
not arise ’ does not apply, ‘ both arises and does not arise ’ does not 
apply, 4 neither arises nor does not arise ’ does not apply.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Vacchagotta spoke thus to 
the Lord: “ Good Gotama, it is like a great sal-tree not far from a 
village or market town whose branches and foliage might be dis- 


1 upddana , fuel, supply; grasping, attachment. 

* nibbayeyya , were to be extinguished, put out, quenched. 



I. 488-489 


167 


To Vacchagotta on Fire 

solved because of their impermanence, whose bark and young shoots 
might be dissolved, whose softwood might be dissolved, so that after 
a time the branches and foliage gone, the bark and young shoots gone, 
the softwood gone, clear of them it would be established on the pith . 1 
It is excellent, good Gotama, excellent, good Gotama. It is as if, 
good Gotama, one might set upright what had been upset, or disclose 
what had been covered, or might show the way to one who had gone 
astray, [ 489 ] or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with 
vision might see material shapes — even so, in many a figure has 
dhamma been made clear by the revered Gotama. I am going to the 
revered Gotama for refuge and to dhamma, and to the Order of monks. 
May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-follower going for refuge 
from this day forth for as long as life lasts/ * 

Discourse to Vacchagotta on Fire: 

The Second 


73. GREATER DISCOURSE TO VACCHAGOTTA 

(Maha-Vacchagottasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding place. Then the 
wanderer Vacchagotta approached the Lord; having approached, he 
exchanged greetings with the Lord; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was 
sitting down at a respectful distance, the wanderer Vacchagotta 
spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ It is a long time since I had a conversation with the good Gotama . 3 
It were good if the revered Gotama were to teach me in brief what 
is skilled and what is unskilled.” 

“ I, Vaccha, could teach you what is skilled and what is unskilled 

1 suddho a 88a sare patitfhito , as at M. i. 31 -32. Cf. M. Stas 29, 30; also 
M . i. 434. 

1 MA , lii. 199-200 points out that the two foregoing Discourses were spoken 
to him, also the Avyavata Samyutta ($, iv. 391 ff.) and a discourse in the 
Aug. (^4. v. 193). While it is reasonably clear that the two foregoing Dis- 
courses were in fact spoken to Vacchagotta before this “ Greater n one, we 
have no idea of the length of time that separated any of them. 



168 73. Maha-V acchagottasiUta I. 489-490 

in brief ; and I, Vaccha, could teach you what is skilled and what is 
unskilled in full. But I, Vaccha, will teach you what is skilled and 
what is unskilled in brief. Listen to it, attend carefully, and I will 
speak.” 

“ Yes, sir,” the wanderer Vacchagotta answered the Lord in assent. 
The Lord spoke thus: 

“ Greed, Vaccha, is unskill, absence of greed is skill. Aversion, 
Vaccha, is unskill, absence of aversion is skill. Confusion, Vaccha, 
is unskill, absence of confusion is skill. These are the three things 
that are unskilled, Vaccha, the three that are skilled. Then, Vaccha, 
onslaught on creatures 1 is unskill, restraint from onslaught on 
creatures is skill. Taking what has not been given, Vaccha, is 
unslrill, restraint from taking what has not been given is skill. 
Wrong conduct in regard to sense-pleasures, Vaccha, is unskill, 
restraint from wrong conduct in regard to sense-pleasures is skill. 
Lying speech, Vaccha, is unskill, restraint from lying speech is skill. 
Slanderous speech, Vaccha, [490] is unskill, restraint from slanderous 
speech is skill. Harsh speech, Vaccha, is unskill, restraint from 
harsh speech is skill. Frivolous chatter, Vaccha, is unslrill, restraint 
from frivolous chatter is skill. Covetousness, Vaccha, is unslrill, 
absence of covetousness is skill. Malevolence, Vaccha, is unslrill, 
absence of malevolence is skill. Wrong view, Vaccha, is unskill, 
right view is skill. 2 These are the ten things that are unskilled, 
Vaccha, and the ten that are skilled. When craving, Vaccha, has 
been got rid of by a monk, cut off at the root, made like a palm-tree 
stump that can come to no further existence in the future, he is a 
monk who is a perfected one, canker-waned, who has lived the life, 
done what was to be done, laid down the burden, attained his own 
goal, the fetters of becoming quite destroyed, freed by right profound 
knowledge.” 

“ Let be the good Gotama. Has the good Gotama even one monk 
who is a disciple and who, by the destruction of the cankers, having 
realised here and now by his own super-knowledge the freedom of 
mind and the freedom through intuitive wisdom that are cankerless, 
entering on them is abiding in them ?” 

“ Not merely a hundred, Vaccha, nor two hundred, three hundred, 
four hundred nor five hundred, but far more are those monks, 
disciples of mine, who, by the destruction of the cankers, having 
realised here and now by their own super-knowledge the freedom of 


1 C/. if. i. 285-286; D . i. 4. 


* This sentence is quoted at Kvu , 505. 



I. 490-491 To Vacchagotta (Greater) 169 

mind and the freedom through intuitive wisdom that are cankerless, 
entering on them are abiding in them.” 

“ Let be the good Gotama, let be the monks. But has the good 
Gotama even one nun who is a disciple and who, by the destruction 
of the cankers, having realised here and now by her own super- 
knowledge the freedom of mind and the freedom through intuitive 
wisdom that are cankerless, entering on them is abiding in them ?” 

“ Not merely a hundred, Vaccha, nor two, three, four or five 
hundred, but far more are those nuns, disciples of mine, who, by the 
destruction of the cankers, having here and now realised by their 
own super-knowledge the freedom of mind and the freedom through 
intuitive wisdom that are cankerless, entering on them are abiding 
in them.” 

“ Let be the good Gotama, let be the monks, let be the nuns. But 
has the good Gotama even one layfollower who is a disciple, a house- 
holder clothed in white, a Brahma-farer who, by the utter destruction 
of the five fetters binding to this lower (shore) is of spontaneous 
uprising, one who has attained nibbana there and is not liable to 
return from that world 1” 

“ Not merely a hundred, Vaccha, nor . . . five hundred, but far 
more are those layfollowers, disciples of mine, householders clothed 
in white, Brahma-farers, who by the utter destruction of the five 
fetters binding to this lower (shore), [491] are of spontaneous up- 
rising, those who have attained nibbana there and are not liable to 
return from that world.” 

“ Let be the good Gotama, let be the monks, let be the nuns, let 
be the lay-followers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma- 
farers. But has the good Gotama even one layfollower who is a 
disciple, a householder clothed in white, and who, (though) an 
enjoyer of sense-pleasures, is a doer of the instruction, one who 
accepts the exhortation, who has crossed over doubt and, perplexity 
gone, fares in the Teacher’s instruction, won to conviction, not 
relying on others V n 

“ Not merely a hundred, Yaccha, nor . . • five hundred, but far 

more are these layfollowers, disciples of mine, householders clothed 
in white, and who, (though) enjoyers of sense-pleasures are doers of 
the instruction, those who accept the exhortation, who have crossed 
over doubt and, perplexity gone, fare in the Teacher’s instruction, 
won to conviction, not relying on others.” 


* As at M. i. 235. 



170 73. Maha-VacchagoUasutta I. 491-492 

“ Let be the good Gotama, let be the monks, let be the nuns, let 
be the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma- 
farers, let be the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, 
enjoyers of sense-pleasures. But has the good Gotama even one 
woman layfollower who is a disciple, a householder clothed in white, 
a Brahma-farer who, by the utter destruction of the five fetters 
binding to this lower (shore), is of spontaneous uprising, one who has 
attained nibbana there and is not liable to return from that world ?” 
“ Not merely & hundred, Vaccha, nor . . . five hundred, but many 

more are those women layfollowers, disciples of mine, householders 
clothed in white, Brahma-farers who, by the utter destruction of the 
five fetters binding to this lower (shore), are of spontaneous uprising, 
those who have attained nibbana there and are not liable to return 
from that world.” 

“ Let be the good Gotama, let be the monks, let be the nuns, let be 
the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma- 
farers, let be the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, 
enjoyers of sense-pleasures, let be the women layfollowers who are 
householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers. But has the good 
Gotama even one woman layfollower who is a disciple, a householder 
clothed in white, and who, (though) an enjoyer of sense-pleasures, 
is a doer of the instruction, one who accepts the exhortation, who 
has crossed over doubt and, perplexity gone, fares in the Teacher’s 
instruction, won to conviction, not relying on others V* 

“ Not merely a hundred, Vaccha, nor two, three, four or five 
hundred, but many more are those women layfollowers, disciples of 
mine, householders clothed in white, and who, (though) enjoyers of 
sense-pleasures, are doers of the instruction, those who accept the 
exhortation, who have crossed over doubt and, perplexity gone, fare 
in the Teacher’s instruction, won to conviction, not relying on others.” 

“ If, good Gotama, the revered Gotama had himself undertaken 
this dhamma but the monks had not undertaken it, [492] then this 
Brahma-faring would have been incomplete as to this factor. But 
because the revered Gotama has undertaken this dhamma and the 
monks have undertaken it as well, so is this Brahma-faring complete 
as to this factor. If, good Gotama, the revered Gotama had himself 
undertaken this dhamma and the monks had undertaken it as well, 
but not the nuns, then this Brahma-faring would have been incom- 
plete as to this factor. But because the revered Gotama has under- 
taken this dhamma and the monks and the nuns have undertaken it 
as well, so is this Brahma-faring complete as to this factor. If, good 



I. 492-493 


171 


To Vacchagotta (Greater) 

Gotama, the revered Gotama had himself undertaken tliis dhamma 
and the monks and the nuns had undertaken it as well, but not the 
layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, 
then this Brahma-faring would have been incomplete as to this 
factor. But because the revered Gotama has undertaken this 
dhamma and the monks and the nuns and the layfollowers who are 
householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, have undertaken it as 
well, so is this Brahma-faring complete as to this factor. If, good 
Gotama, the revered Gotama had himself undertaken this dhamma 
and the monks and the nuns and the layfollowers who are house- 
holders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, had undertaken it as well, 
but not the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, 
enjoyers of sense-pleasures, then this Brahma-faring would have 
been incomplete as to this factor. But because the revered Gotama 
has undertaken this dhamma , and the monks and the nuns and the 
layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, 
and the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, enjoyers 
of sense-pleasures, have undertaken it as well, so is this Brahma- 
faring complete as to this factor. If, good Gotama, the revered 
Gotama had himself undertaken this dhamma and the monks and 
. . . the layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, enjoyers 
of sense-pleasures, had undertaken it as well, but not the women 
lay followers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, 
[493] then this Brahma-faring would have been incomplete as to this 
factor. But because the revered Gotama has undertaken this 
dhamma , and the monks and the nuns and the layfollowers who are 
householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, and the layfollowers 
who are householders clothed in white, enjoyers of sense-pleasures, 
and the women layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, 
Brahma-farers, have undertaken it as well, so is this Brahma-faring 
complete as to this factor. If, good Gotama, the revered Gotama 
had himself undertaken this dhamma and the monks and . . . the 
women layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma- 
farers, had undertaken it as well, but not the women layfollowers 
who are householders clothed in white, enjoyers of sense-pleasures, 
then the Brahma-faring would have been incomplete as to this factor. 
But because the revered Gotama has undertaken this dhamma, and 
the monks and the nuns and the layfollowers who are householders 
clothed in white, Brahma-farers, and the layfollowers who are house- 
holders clothed in white, enjoyers of sense-pleasures, and the women 
layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, Brahma-farers, 



172 


I. 493-494 


73. Mdha- Vacchogottasutta 

and the women layfollowers who are householders clothed in white, 
enjoyers of sense-pleasures, have undertaken it as well, so is this 
Brahma-faring complete as to this factor. 

Good Gotama, as the river Ganges, 1 sliding towards the sea, 
tending towards the sea, inclining towards the sea, stands knocking 
at* the sea, even so this company of the good Gotama, comprising 
householders and those that have gone forth, 3 sliding towards 
nibbana, tending towards nibbana, inclining towards nibbana, 
stands knocking at nibbana. It is excellent, good Gotama, excellent, 
good Gotama. It is as if, good Gotama, one might set upright what 
had been upset, or disclose what had been covered, or might show 
the way to one that had gone astray, or bring an oil-lamp into the 
darkness so that those with vision might see material shapes — even 
so in many a figure is dhamma made clear by the revered Gotama. 
I am going to the revered Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to 
the Order of monks. May I receive the going forth in the good 
Gotama’s presence, may I receive ordination.” 

[ 494 ] “ Vaccha, if a former member of another sect 4 wishes for the 
going forth in this dhamma and discipline, wishes for ordination, he 
undertakes probation for four months; at the end of the four months 
the monks, if they so decide, may let him go forth, may ordain him 
into the status of a monk ; but even here differences among individuals 
are known to me.” 

“ If, revered sir, former members of other sects, desiring the going 
forth in this dhamma and discipline, desiring ordination, undertake 
probation for four months, and at the end of the four months the 
monks, if they so decide, let them go forth, ordain them into the 
status of a monk, then will I undertake probation for four years; at 
the end of the four years the monks, if they so decide, may let me 
go forth, may ordain me into the status of a monk.” But the 
wanderer Vacchagotta received the going forth in the Lord’s 
presence, he received ordination. 

Not long after the venerable Vacchagotta was ordained, half a 
month after he was ordained, he approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
venerable Vacchagotta spoke thus to the Lord: 

* Cf. S. V. 39-40. 

* dhacoa titthati , stands knocking or striking at. Cf. S. ii. 43, 45, 58, 80, 
amatadvaram ahacca titthati . 

* parisd sagahatfhapabbajita; cf, Vin. i. 1 15. 


4 As at if. i. 391, 512. 



I. 494-495 To Vacchagotta (i Greater ) 173 

“ Revered sir, I have attained as much as can be attained by a 
learner’s knowledge, a learner’s lore. 1 Let the Lord teach me some 
further dhamma ,” 2 * 

“ Well then, do you, Vaccha, develop two things further: calm and . 
vision. If these two things : calm and vision, are developed further, 
Vaccha, they will conduce to the penetration of a variety of elements. 8 

If you, Vaccha, should wish like this: ‘May I experience 4 * the 
various forms of psychic power: having been one may I be manifold, 
having been manifold may I be one; manifest or invisible may I go 
unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a mountain 
as if through air ; may I plunge into the earth and shoot up again as 
if in water ; may I walk upon the water without parting it as if on the 
ground; sitting cross-legged, may I travel through the air like a bird 
on the wing; with my hand may I rub and stroke this moon and sun 
although they are of such mighty power and majesty; and even as 
far as the Brahma-world may I have power in respect of my person ’ 
— you will achieve what may be realised here and there 6 * so long as 
there is the objective, 4 

If you, Vaccha, should wish like this: 1 May I, [495] with the 
purified diem-hearing surpassing that of men, hear both (kinds of) 
sounds — dew - like ones and human ones, whether they be far or near ’ 
— you will achieve what may be realised here and there, so long as 
there is the objective. 

If you, Vaccha, should wish like this: ‘ May I know intuitively by 
mind the minds of other beings, of other individuals, so that I may 
know intuitively of a mind that is full of attachment . . . aversion . . . 
confusion, that it is full of attachment . . . aversion . . . confusion; 
or of a mind that is without attachment . . . aversion . . . confusion, 
that it is without attachment . . . without aversion . . . without 
confusion ; or that I may know intuitively of a mind that is contracted 
that it is contracted, or of a mind that is distracted that it is distracted, 
or of a mind that has become great that it has become great, or of a 
mind that has not become great that it has not become great, or of a 


1 vijja. MA. iii. 201 quotes Dhs. 1010, 1400, katame ca dhamma sekhd ? 

and says non-returning was attained. 

* uttar im dhammam. * dhatu . * With the following cf. if. i. 34. 

* tatra tatr ’ eva saiclch ibhabbata m pdpunissasi. 

* sati sati dyatanc , quoted at DA . 125. MA . iii. 202, iv. 140 explain by 

karanc. Cf . Jd. i. 251, anayatane akanvie. Ayatana seems almost to be 

cause, right object, objective, inducement or sufficient reason. Same 

expression is used at if. iii. 90, A. iii. 27. 



174 


I. 495-496 


73. Mahd-Vacchagattasntta 

mind with (some other mental state) superior to it that it has (some 
other mental state) superior to it, or of a mind that has no (other 
mental state) superior to it that it has no (other mental state) 
superior to it, or of a mind that is composed that it is composed, or of 
a mind that is not composed that it is not composed, or of a mind that 
is freed that it is freed, or of a mind that is not freed that it is not 
freed ’ — you will achieve what may be realised here and there, so long 
as there is the objective. 

If you, Vaccha, should wish like this: 4 May I recollect (my) 
manifold former habitations, that is to say one birth, two births, 
three . . . four . . . five . . . ten . . . twenty . . . thirty . . . forty . . . fifty 
... a hundred ... a thousand ... a hundred thousand births, many 
an eon of integration, many an eon of disintegration, many an eon of 
integration-disintegration; such a one was I by name, having such 
and such a clan, such and such a colour, so was I nourished, such and 
such pleasant and painful experiences were mine, so did the span of 
life end. Passing from this, I came to be in another state where such 
a one was I by name, having such and such a clan, such and such a 
colour, so was I nourished, such and such pleasant and painful 
experiences were mine, so did the span of life end. Passing from this 
I arose here. Thus I recollect (my) divers former habitations in all 
their modes and detail ‘ — you will achieve what may be realised 
here and there, so long as there is the objective. [496] If you, 
Vaccha, should wish like this: ‘ With the purified deva- vision sur- 
passing that of men, may I behold beings as they pass hence or come 
to be — mean, excellent, comely, ugly, in a good bourn, in a bad 
bourn according to the consequences of deeds; may I comprehend: 
Indeed these worthy beings were possessed of wrong conduct in body, 
speech and thought, they were scoffers at the ariyans, holding a 
wrong view, incurring deeds consequent on a wrong view — these, at 
the breaking up of the body after dying, have arisen in a sorrowful 
state, a bad bourn, the abyss, Niraya Hell. But these worthy beings 
who were possessed of right conduct in body, speech and thought, 
who were not scoffers at the ariyans, holding a right view, incurring 
deeds consequent on a right view — these at the breaking up of the 
body after dying, have arisen in a good bourn, a heaven world. Thus 
with the purified dem-vision surpassing that of men may I behold 
beings as they pass hence, as they come to be, may I comprehend 
that they are mean, excellent, comely, ugly, in a good bourn, in a bad 
bourn according to the consequences of deeds ’ — you will achieve 
what may be realised here and there, so long as there is the objective. 



I. 496-497 To Vacchagotia (Greater) 175 

If you, Vaecha, should wish like this; * By the destruction of the 
cankers, having realised here and now by my own super-knowledge 
the freedom of mind and the freedom through intuitive wisdom that 
are cankerless, entering thereon, may I abide therein’ — you will 
achieve what may be realised here and there, so long as there is the 
objective/’ 

Then the venerable Vacchagotta, having rejoiced in what the 
Lord had said, having given thanks, rising from his seat, having 
greeted the Lord, departed keeping his right side towards him. Then 
the venerable Vacchagotta, having soon realised here and now through 
his own super-knowledge that incomparable goal of the Brahma- 
faring for the sake of which young men of family rightly go forth 
from home into homelessness, entering on it, abided in it. And he 
understood : Destroyed is birth, brought to a close is the Brahma- 
faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of being such 
or so. And the venerable Vacchagotta became one of the perfected 
ones. 1 

Now at that time a number of monks were going to see the Lord. 
The venerable Vacchagotta saw these monks coming in the distance ; 
having seen them, he approached these monks; having approached, 
he spoke thus to these monks; 

[497] “ But now, where are you venerable ones going ?” 

“ We are going to see the Lord, your reverence/’ 

“ Well then, in my name let the venerable ones salute the Lord’s 
feet with their heads, saying, * Revered sir, the monk Vacchagotta 
salutes the Lord’s feet with his head,’ and then say: ‘ The Lord is 
waited on* by me, the Well-farer is waited on by me/ ” 

“ Yes, your reverence,” these monks answered the venerable 
Vacchagotta in assent. Then these monks approached the Lord; 
having approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a 
respectful distance. As they were sitting down at a respectful 
distance these monks spoke thus to the Lord : 

“ Revered sir, the venerable Vacchagotta salutes the Lord’s feet 

with his head and speaks thus: ‘ The Lord is waited on' by me, the 

Well-farer is waited on by me/ ” 

“ Monks, by a reasoning of mind I already knew the mind of the 
monk Vacchagotta: of threefold knowledge is the monk Vaccha- 
gotta, of great psychic power, of great majesty. And devatds also 


1 His verse is at Thag , 112. 

* paricitma; cf. 8. iv. 57; Thaq . 178, 604, 687, 792, 891. 




176 


I. 497 


73. Maka-VacchagottastUta 

told me this matter: 1 ‘ Of threefold knowledge is the monk Vaecha- 
gotta, revered sir, he is of great psychic power, of great majesty.’ ” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 


Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta : 
The Third 


74. DISCOURSE TO DlGHANAKHA 

(Dlghanakhasutta) 2 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
on Mount Vulture Peak in the Boar’s Cave. 3 Then the wanderer 
Dighanakka 4 approached the Lord; haying approached, he ex- 
changed greetings with the Lord; having conversed in a friendly and 
courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance. 5 As he was 
standing at a respectful distance, the wanderer Dfghanakha spoke 
thus to the Lord : 

“ I, good Gotama, speak thus, I am of this view: All® is not 
pleasing to me/’ 

“ This view of yours, Aggivessana: 7 All is not pleasing to me — 
does this view of yours not please you V 9 

1 MA. iii. 202 explains by lesarh gundnam labhx devatd : devatas are the 
recipients of (or, are possessed of, or, are psychically intuitive of) these 
qualities; cf. DA . 120. It is possible that in such contexts devatd stands 
for a mental or psychical faculty. 

* Cf. DA. 418, 882, DhA. i. 96, 8 A. i. 122, ii. 63, 234, etc., where this Sutta 
is referred to as Vedandpariggahanasuttanta. 

* This cave, Sukar&khata, is also mentioned at 8. v. 233. 8 A. iii. 249 
gives the same account of it as does MA . iii. 203. 

4 Sfiriputta’s nephew. 

4 MA. iii, 203 says that he Btood at a respectful distance because the Elder 
(Sariputta) was standing fanning the Lord, as below, p. 180. 

* MA. iii. 204 explains M all,” sabbam , for Dfghanakha as all uprisings and 
re-linkings, for to this extent he is an annihilationist. Gotama, however, 
takes “ all ” in its literal sense. 

’ Cf. M. i. 229 /., 238 Jf. and M. iii. 128 /. for this epithet. 




I* 497-498 To Dlghanakha 177 

“ If this view were pleasing to me, good Gotama, this would be 
like it too, that [ 498 ] would be like it too. 1 ” 

“ Now, Aggivessana, when those, the majority in the world, speak 
thus: 4 This would be like it too, that would be like it too ’ — they do 
not get rid of that very view, and they take up another view. 2 Now, 
Aggivessana, when those, the minority in the world, speak thus: 

‘ This would be like it too, that would be like it too * — they get rid of 
that very view and do not take up another view. 

There are, Aggivessana, some recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view: ‘All is pleasing to me.* There are, 
Aggivessana, some recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of 
this view: ‘All is not pleasing to me.’ There are, Aggivessana, 
some recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of this view: 
‘ Part is pleasing to me, part is not pleasing to me.’ As to this, 
Aggivessana, those recluses and brahmans who speak thus and are of 
this view: ‘ All is pleasing to me * — this view of theirs is close to 3 
attachment, close to the fetters, close to delight, close to cleaving, 
close to grasping. As to this, Aggivessana, those recluses and 
brahmans who speak thus and arc of this view: ‘ All is not pleasing to 
me * — this view of theirs is close to detachment, close to the absence 
of fetters, close to the absence of delight, close to the absence of 
cleaving, close to the absence of grasping.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Dlghanakha spoke thus 
to the Lord: “ The good Gotama is complimentary to my view, the 
good Gotama is very complimentary to my view.” 

“ As to this, Aggivessana, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view: 1 Part is pleasing to me, part is not 
pleasing to me ’—that which in this view is pleasing to them is close 
to attachment, close to the fetters . . . close to grasping. But that 
which in this view is not pleasing to them is close to detachment, 
close to the absence of fetters . . . close to the absence of grasping. 

Concerning those recluses and brahmans, Aggivessana, who speak 
thus and are of this view: ‘ All is pleasing to me,’ if a learned man be 
there who reflects thus: 1 If I were to express this view of mine: 
“ All is pleasing to me,” and, obstinately holding to it and adhering 
to it, 4 were to say: “ This is indeed the truth, all else is falsehood ” 
— there would be for me dispute with two (view-holders): both with 
whatever recluse or brahman speaks thus and is of this view: “ AH 

1 That is, 44 pleasing ” too. 

* M A. iii. 205 distinguishes these views as annihilationism and ctcrnalism. 

* As at M. I 411. « As at M. i. 130, 257. 



178 74, Dlghanakhasutta I. 498-499 

is not pleasing to me,” and with whatever recluse or brahman speaks 
thus and [499] is of this view: “ Part is pleasing to me, part is not 
pleasing to me ” — there would be dispute for me with these two. If 
there is dispute there is contention; if there is contention there is 
trouble; if there is trouble there is vexation.’ 1 So he, beholding 
this dispute and contention and trouble and vexation for himself, 
gets rid of that very view and does not take up another view. Thus 
is the getting rid of these views, thus is the casting out of these views. 

As to this, Aggivessana, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view : ‘All is not pleasing to me ’ — if a learned man 
be there who reflects thus: ‘ If I were to express this view of mine 
that: “ All is not pleasing to me,” and, obstinately holding to it and 
adhering to it, were to say: “ This is the very truth, all else is false- 
hood,” there would be for me dispute with two (view-holders): both 
with whatever recluse or brahman speaks thus and is of this view: 
** All is pleasing to me,” and with whatever recluse or brahman speaks 
thus and is of this view : “ Part is pleasing to me, part is not pleasing 
to me ” — there would be dispute for me with these two. If there 
is dispute there is contention, if there is contention there is trouble, 
if there is trouble there is vexation.’ So he, beholding this dispute 
and contention and trouble and vexation for himself, gets rid of that 
very view and does not take up another view. Thus is the getting 
rid of these views, thus is the casting out of these views. 

As to this, Aggivessana, those recluses and brahmans who speak 
thus and are of this view : ‘ Part is pleasing to me, part is not pleasing 
to me 5 — if a learned man be there who reflects thus : 1 If I were to ex- 
press this view of mine : “ Part is pleasing to me, part is not pleasing 
to me,” and, obstinately holding to it and adhering to it, were to 
say: “ This is the very truth, all else is falsehood,” there would be 
for me dispute with two (view-holders) : both with whatever recluse 
or brahman speaks thus and is of this view: “ All is pleasing to me,” 
and with whatever recluse or brahman speaks thus and is of this 
view: u All is not pleasing to me ” — there would be dispute for me 
with these two. If there is dispute there is contention, if there is 
contention there is trouble, if there is trouble there is vexation.’ So 
he, beholding this dispute and contention and trouble and vexation 
for himself, gets rid of that very view and does not take up another 
view. Thus is the getting rid of these views, thus is the casting out 
of these views. 

1 There is no indication whether the thoughts of the learned man stop here 
or at the end of the previous sentence. 



I. 500 


179 


To DTghanakha 

[ 500 ] But this body, Aggivessana, which has material shape, 
is made up of the four great elements, originating from mother 
and father, nourished on gruel and sour milk, of a nature to be con- 
stantly rubbed away, pounded away, broken up and scattered , 1 
should be regarded as impermanent, suffering, as a disease, an im- 
posthume, a dart, a misfortune, an affliction, as other, as decay, 
empty, not-self . 2 When he regards this body as impermanent, suffer- 
ing, as a disease, an imposthume, a dart, a misfortune, an affliction, 
as other, as decay, empty, not-self, whatever in regard to body is 
desire for body, affection for body, subordination to body, this is 
got rid of. 

There are these three feelings, Aggivessana: pleasant feeling, 
painful feeling, feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant. At the 
time, Aggivessana, when one feels a pleasant feeling, at that time 
one feels neither a painful feeling nor does one feel a feeling that is 
neither painful nor pleasant. At the time, Aggivessana, when one 
feels a painful feeling, at that time one feels neither a pleasant feeling 
nor does one feel a feeling that is neither painful nor pleasant. 
At the time, Aggivessana, when one feels a feeling that is neither 
painful nor pleasant, at that time one feels neither a pleasant 
feeling nor does one feel a painful feeling. Pleasant feelings, 
Aggivessana, are impermanent, compounded, generated by condi- 
tions, liable to destruction, liable to decay, liable to fading away, 
liable to stopping . 3 And painful feelings . . , And, Aggivessana, 
feelings that are neither painful nor pleasant are impermanent, 
compounded, generated by conditions, liable to destruction, liable 
to decay, liable to fading away, liable to stopping. Seeing it thus, 
Aggivessana, an instructed disciple of the ariyans turns away from 
pleasant feelings and he turns away from painful feelings and he turns 
away from feelings that are neither painful nor pleasant; turning 
away he is dispassionate, being dispassionate he is freed , 4 in freedom 
the knowledge comes to be that he is freed and he comprehends: 
4 Destroyed is birth, brought to a close is the Brahma-faring, done 
is what was to be done, there is no more of being such or so. J A 
monk whose mind is freed thus, Aggivessana, does not concur with 


* As at M. i. 144. 

2 As at M. i. 435. 

3 Cf, D. iii. 275, 14 the escape from what has become, is composite, originating 
from conditions, is its stopping"; and see 8 . ii. 26 which enumerates the things 
that, arising from cause, are impermanent, etc.; cf, A . v. 187. 

4 Cf . 8 , ii. 94, 125, iv. 2. 86; also 8 . iii. 46, 189; A. v. 3. 



180 74. BighamkhasuUa I. 500-601 

anyone, he does not dispute with anyone. 1 He makes use of the 
common phrases of the world without adhering to them.”* 

Now at that time the venerable Sariputta [501] was standing 
behind the Lord, fanning the Lord. Then it occurred to the vener- 
able Sariputta : “ The Lord speaks to us of getting rid of these things 
and those by means of super-knowledge, 3 the Well-farer speaks to us 
of casting out these things and those by means of super-knowledge.” 
While the venerable Sariputta was reflecting on this, his mind was 
freed from the cankers without clinging. But to the wanderer 
Dighanakha there arose the stainless, spotless vision of dhamma , that 
whatever is of the nature to arise all that is of the nature to stop. 
Then the wanderer Dighanakha, having seen dhamma , attained 
dhamma, known dhamma , plunged into dhamma , having crossed over 
doubt, having put away uncertainty, attaining without another’s 
help to full confidence in the Teacher’s instruction, 4 spoke thus to 
the Lord: 

“ It is excellent, good Gotama, excellent, good Gotama. It is, 
good Gotama, as if one might set upright what had been upset, or 
might disclose what had been covered, or point out the Way to one 
who had gone astray, or might bring an oil-lamp into the darkness 
so that those with vision might see material shapes — even so in many 
a figure has dhamma been made clear by the good Gotama. I am 
going to the revered Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to the 
Order of monks. May the revered Gotama accept me as a layfollower 
going for refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Dighanakha: 

The Fourth 

1 Cf. 8. iii. 138. MA . iii. 208 says he does not concur with the etemalists 
nor dispute with the partial-eternaliste. 

* Cf. 8 . i. 14; D. i. 202, quoted at MA. iii. 208. 

* MA. iii. 208 says “ he talked about the getting rid of the eternal having 
known through super-knowledge the etemalism of these things and those; 
he speaks of getting rid of the partially eternal through super-knowledge 
as to annihilation, as to partial etemalism ; he speaks of getting rid of material 
shape through super-knowledge as to material shape”. 

4 As at Fin. i. 12. 



75. DISCOURSE TO MAGANDIYA 

(Magandiyasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying among the 
Kurus — the market town of the Kurus was called Kammassadhamma 
— on a spreading of grass in the fire-room 1 of a brahman of the 
Bharadvaja clan. Then the Lord, having dressed early in the 
morning, taking his bowl and robe, entered Kammassadhamma for 
almsfood. Having walked in Kammassadhamma for almsfood, 
returning from his alms-gathering after the meal, having plunged 
into a forest thicket, he sat down at the root of a tree for the day- 
sojourn. 

[502] Then the wanderer Magandiya, who was constantly pacing 
up and down and roaming about on foot, approached the fire-room 
of the brahman of the Bharadvaja clan. The wanderer Magandiya 
saw the spreading of grass made ready in the fire-room of the brahman 
of the Bharadvaja clan; seeing it, he spoke thus to the brahman of 
the Bharadvaja clan: “ For whom is this spreading of grass laid 
down in the good Bharadvaja’s fire-room ? It seems like a recluse’s 
sleeping place.” 

u Magandiya, there is the recluse Gotama, son of the Sakyans, 
gone forth from the Sakyan clan, and about this revered Gotama 
a lovely reputation has gone abroad thus: He is indeed the Lord, 
perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, endowed with right know- 
ledge and conduct, knower of the worlds, Well-farer, incomparable 
trainer of men to be tamed, teacher of dews and men, the Awakened 
One, the Lord. That sleeping place is ready for this good Gotama.” 

“ Indeed, good Bharadvaja, we are seeing a poor sight in seeing 
the sleeping place of the good Gotama, the destroyer of growth.” 1 

1 MA> iii. 209, in the agnihotra-hall 

* bhunahuno. MA. iii. 211: hatavaiihino mariyadakarakassa . . . vaddhi- 
hato mariyadakarako, a killer of growths, the maker of stringent controls 
(or, rules); and it explains by saying that MSgandiya holds that there should 
be development and growth in all the six sense-spheres, while the Lord holds 
that there should bo restraint of them, and MA. cites verses at Miln. 107. 
The word bhunahu occurs at Sn. 664, in voc. (SnA. 479: bhutihanaka vuddhi - 
ndsaka) and at Jd. v. 266, in the plural. See JaA. v. 272: te islnam ativattdro 
attano vcujdhiyd halattd bhunahuno. Cf. Miln . 314, bhiUahacca , citing the above 
M. passage. Chalmers translates bhunahu as “ rigid repressionist,” t.e. of the 

181 




182 


I. 502-503 


“ Mind what you say, 1 Magandiya, mind what you say, Magan- 
diya. For many learned nobles and learned brahmans and learned 
householders and learned recluses have great faith in this good 
Gotama, and are trained in the ariyan right path, in dhamma , in what 
is skilled. ,,a 

“ If we could only see that revered Gotama face to face, Bharad- 
vaja, face to face would we say to him: ‘ The recluse Gotama is a 
destroyer of growth.’ What is the reason for this ? It is handed 
down thus in a discourse of ours.” 

“ If it is not disagreeable to the good Magandiya, I will tell this to 
the recluse Gotama.” 

“ It is of no consequence if the good Bharadvaja should tell him 
just what has been said.” 

Then the Lord, with purified dew-hearing surpassing that of men, 
heard this conversation between the brahman of the Bharadvaja 
clan and the wanderer Magandiya. Then the Lord, emerging from 
solitary meditation towards evening, approached the fire-room of the 
brahman of the Bharadvaja clan; having approached, he sat down 
on the spreading of grass that was ready. Then the brahman of the 
Bharadvaja clan approached the Lord; having approached, he 
exchanged greetings with the Lord; and having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
As the brahman of the Bharadvaja clan was sitting down at a 
respectful distance, the Lord spoke thus to him: 

“ There was some conversation, Bharadvaja, between you and the 
wanderer Magandiya [508] concerning this same grass spreading.” 

When this had been said the brahman Bharadvaja, greatly moved 
and startled, spoke thus to the Lord: “ But this was the very thing 
I wanted to tell the good Gotama, but the revered Gotama anticipated 
me. 

But this conversation between the Lord and the brahman of the 
Bharadvaja clan was interrupted when the wanderer Magandiya, 
who was constantly pacing up and down and roaming about on foot, 
approached the Lord in the fire-room of the brahman of the Bharad- 
vaja clan; having approached, he exchanged greetings with the 
Lord ; having conversed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down 

1 As at Vin. ii. 186. 

* ariye naye dhamme kusale . Cf. M . ii. 181, 197, A . i. 69, D. ii. 161. MA . 
iii. 211 says: parisuddhe kdrane dhamme anavajje . 


senses, which the wanderer thinks should be given full scope. See above 
Intr. p. xv. 




L 503-504 To Magandiya 183 

at a respectful distance. As the wanderer Magandiya was sitting 
down at a respectful distance, the Lord spoke thus to him: 1 

“ Magandiya, the eye delights in material shapes, is delighted by 
material shapes, rejoices in material shapes; it is tamed, watched, 
guarded and controlled by a Tathagata, and he teaches dhamma for 
its control. Was it on account of this, Magandiya, that you said: 
‘ The recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth* ? ” 

“ Just on account of this did I say, good Gotama: ‘ The recluse 
Gotama is a destroyer of growth.* What is the reason for this ? 
It is handed down thus in a discourse of ours.** 

“ The ear, Magandiya, delights in sounds . , . the nose in smells 
. . . the tongue in tastes . . . the body in touches . . , the mind, 
Magandiya, delights in mental states, is delighted by mental states, 
rejoices in mental states; it is tamed, watched, guarded, controlled 
by a Tathagata, and he teaches dhamma for its control. Was it on 
account of this, Magandiya, that you said : ‘ The recluse Gotama is 
a destroyer of growth* ? *’ 

“ Just on account of this, good Gotama, did I say: ‘ The recluse 
Gotama is a destroyer of growth.* What is the reason for this ? It 
is handed down thus in a discourse of ours.** 

“ What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Suppose someone 
[ 504 ] who formerly revelled in material shapes cognisable by the 
eye — agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual 
pleasure, alluring — after a time, having known the coming to be and 
passing away of material shapes and the satisfaction and the peril 
of them and the escape (from them) as it really is, getting rid of 
craving for material shapes, suppressing the fever for material shapes, 
should dwell devoid of thirst, his mind inwardly calmed. What 
have you, Magandiya, to say of him ?** 

“ Nothing, good Gotama.*’ 

“ What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Suppose someone 
who formerly revelled in sounds cognisable by the ear ... in smells 
cognisable by the nose ... in tastes cognisable by the tongue ... in 
touches cognisable by the body — agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, 
connected with sensual pleasure, alluring — after a time, having 
known the coming to be and passing away of touches and the satis- 
faction and the peril of them and the escape (from them) as it really 
is, getting rid of the craving for touches, suppressing the fever for 


1 MA . iii. 213 says it is said that tho Lord told tho wanderer not to speak 
to him, and began teaching dhamma at once. 



184 75. Magandiyasutta I. 504-505 

touches, should dwell devoid of thirst, his mind inwardly calmed. 
What have you, Magandiya, to say of him ?” 

“ Nothing, good Gotama.” 

“ Now I, Magandiya, when I was formerly a householder, endowed 
and provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures, revelled in them 
— in material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant . . . 
in sounds cognisable by the ear . . . in smells cognisable by the nose 
... in tastes cognisable by the tongue ... in touches cognisable by the 
body, agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connagted with sensual 
pleasures, alluring. I had three palaces, Magandiya, one for the 
rains, one for the cold weather, one for the hot weather. I, Magan- 
diya, during the four months of the rains being delighted in the 
palace for the rains by women musicians, 1 * did not come down from 
that palace. But after a time, having known the coming to be and 
passing away of sense-pleasures and the satisfaction and the peril of 
them and the escape as it really is, getting rid of the craving for 
sense-pleasures, suppressing the fever for sense-pleasures, I dwelt 
devoid of thirst, my mind inwardly calmed. I saw other beings not 
yet devoid of attachment to sense-pleasures who were pursuing 
sense-pleasures (although) they were being consumed by craving for 
sense-pleasures, burning with the fever for sense-pleasures. I did 
not envy them: I had no delight therein. What was the reason for 
this ? It was, Magandiya, that there is this delight which, apart 
from pleasures of the senses, apart from unskilled states of mind, 
[605] stands firm on reaching 8 a dew - like happiness. Delighting in 
this delight, 3 I do not envy what is low, 4 * I have no deHght therein. 

Magandiya, it is like a householder or a householder’s son, rich, of 
great wealth, of many possessions who, endowed and provided with 
the five strands of sense-pleasures, might revel in them — in material 
shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant ... in sounds 
cognisable by the ear . . . in smells cognisable by the nose ... in tastes 
cognisable by the tongue ... in touches cognisable by the body, 
agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, 


1 MA. iii. 215-6 says there were women everywhere; they were not only 
musicians, but door-keepers and barbers. 

* mmadhiggayha tttlhati as at M. ii, 25; S. i. 86; Iii. p. 16. Samadhiganhati 
appears to mean to reach, acquire, and also to distinguish (see MA. iii. 268 
where it is glossed by visesetvd). 

* MA. iii. 216 says the delight of attaining the fruit of the fourth meditation. 

4 hinassa , MA. iii. 217 gives himjanasukha and also the five strands of 

human sense-pleasures. 



I. 605-506 To Magandiya 185 

alluring. He, having behaved well in body, having behaved well in 
speech, having behaved well in thought, at the breaking up of the 
body after dying, might arise in a good bourn, a heaven world, in 
companionship with the Devas of the Thirty-Three. Surrounded 
there in the Nandana Grove by a throng of nymphs, lie, endowed and 
provided with the five deva - Uke strands of pleasures of the senses, 
might revel in them. He might see a householder or a householder’s 
son endowed and provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures. 
What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Would that young 
deva , surrounded by a throng of nymphs in the Nandana Grove, 
endowed and provided with the five devo-like strands of sense- 
pleasures and revelling in them — would he envy that householder or 
householder’s son or their five strands of human sense-pleasures, and 
revert to human sense-pleasures 1” 

“ No, good Gotama. What is the reason for this ? It is that 
deva-Kke sense-pleasures are more wonderful and excellent than 
human sense-pleasures.” 

“ Even so did I, Magandiya, when I was formerly a householder, 
endowed and provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures, revel 
in them — in material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, 
pleasant ... in sounds cognisable by the ear ... in smells cognisable 
by the nose ... in tastes cognisable by the tongue ... in touches 
cognisable by the body, agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected 
with sensual pleasure, alluring. But after a time, having known the 
coming to be and passing away of sense-pleasures and the satisfaction 
and peril of them and the escape as it really is, getting rid of the 
craving for sense-pleasures, suppressing the fever for sense-pleasures, 
I dwelt devoid of thirst, my mind inwardly calmed. I saw other 
beings not yet devoid of attachment to sense-pleasures who were 
pursuing sense-pleasures (although) they were being consumed by 
the craving for sense-pleasures, [ 506 ] burning with the fever for 
sense-pleasures. I did not envy them ; I had no delight therein. What 
was the reason for this ? It was, Magandiya, that there is this 
delight which, apart from pleasures of the senses, apart from un- 
skilled states of mind, stands firm on reaching a deva - like happiness. 
Delighting in this delight, I do not envy what is low, I have no 
delight therein. 

Magandiya, it is like a leper, a man with his limbs all ravaged and 
festering, 1 and who, being eaten by vermin, tearing his open sores 


* Cf . 8 . iv. 198. 




18G 75. Mdgandiyasutta I. 506-507 

with his nails, might scorch his body over a charcoal pit; his friends 
and acquaintances, his kith and kin might procure a physician and 
surgeon 1 ; that physician and surgeon might make up a medicine ; he, 
taking that medicine, might be freed of that leprosy, he might be 
well, at ease, independent, his own master, going wherever he liked. 2 
He might see another leper, a man with his limbs all ravaged and 
festering, and who . . . might scorch his body over a charcoal 
pit. What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Would that 
man envy that other leper man his charcoal pit or his course of 
medicine ?” 

“ No, good Gotama. What is the reason for this ? It is, good 
Gotama, that if there is illness, there is something to be done 
through medicine ; but if there is not illness there is nothing to be 
done through medicine.” 

“ Even so did I, Magandiya, when I was formerly a householder, 
endowed and provided with the five strands of sense-pleasures, revel 
in them . . . But after a time ... I do not envy what is low, I have 
no delight therein. 

[507] Magandiya, it is like a leper ... he might be well, at ease, 
independent, going wherever he liked. Two strong men, taking 
hold of him by his arms, might drag him towards a charcoal pit. 
What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Would not that man 
twist his body this way and that ?” 3 

“ Yes, good Gotama. What is the reason for that ? It is, good 
Gotama, that contact with the fire is painful, for it is both exceed- 
ingly hot and afflicting.” 

“ What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Is it only now that 
contact with the fire is painful and both exceedingly hot and 
afflicting, or was contact with that fire also painful before and both 
exceedingly hot and afflicting ?” 

“ It is both now, good Gotama, that contact with the fire is painful, 
exceedingly hot and afflicting, and also before that contact with that 
fire was painful, exceedingly hot and afflicting. Yet, good Gotama, 
this leper, a man with his limbs all ravaged and festering, being eaten 
by vermin, tearing his open sores with his nails, his sense-organs 
injured, 4 might, from the painful contact with the fire, receive a 
change of sensation and think it pleasant.” 

“ Even so, Magandiya, far into the past contact of sense-pleasures 


1 As at M. i. 429, ii. 216. 

* As at M. i. 365. 


* M. ii. 216. 

4 vpahatindrtya . 




I. 507-508 


187 


To Magandiya 

is painful, exceedingly hot and afflicting, far into the future too . . . 
and also now in the present contact of sense-pleasures is painful, 
exceedingly hot and afflicting. But those beings, Magandiya, not 
yet devoid of attachment to pleasures of the senses, who are being 
consumed by the craving for sense-pleasures and burning with the 
fever for sense-pleasures, their sense-organs injured, may, from 
painful contact with sense-pleasures themselves, receive a change of 
sensation and think it pleasant. 

Magandiya, it is like a leper, a man with his limbs all ravaged and 
festering, and who, being eaten by vermin, tearing his open sores 
with his nails, scorches his body over a charcoal pit. But the more, 
Magandiya, this leper, a man with his limbs . . . scorches his body 
over a charcoal pit, the more those open sores of his [508] become 
septic and evil-smelling and putrefying and there is only a sorry 
relief and satisfaction to be had from scratching the open sores. 
Even so, Magandiya, do beings who are not yet devoid of attachment 
to sense-pleasures, while being consumed by the craving for sense- 
pleasures and burning with the fever for sense-pleasures, pursue 
sense-pleasures; and the more these beings who are not yet devoid of 
attachment to sense-pleasures . . . pursue them, the more their 
craving for sense-pleasures increases, the more they burn with 
the fever for sense-pleasures, and moreover there is only a sorry 
relief and satisfaction to be had from the five strands of sense- 
pleasures. 

What do you think about this, Magandiya ? Have you ever seen 
or heard of a king or a king’s chief minister who, endowed and 
provided with the five strands of sense-pleasure — revelling in them 
— and who had neither got rid of the craving for sense-pleasures nor 
suppressed the fever for sense-pleasures, dwelt or is dwelling or will 
dwell devoid of thirst, his mind inwardly calmed V* 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

“ It is good, Magandiya. Neither have I seen or heard of this, 
that a king or a king’s chief minister . . . his mind inwardly calmed. 

But, Magandiya, whatever recluses and brahmans, dwelt or are 

dwelling or will dwell, devoid of thirst, with a mind inwardly calmed, 
all these, having known the coming to be and passing away of these 
same sense-pleasures, their satisfaction and peril and the escape as it 
really is, on getting rid of the craving for sense-pleasures, suppressing 
the fever for sense-pleasures, dwelt or are dwelling or will dwell 
devoid of thirst, with a mind inwardly calmed.” 

Then the Lord at that time uttered this solemn utterance : 



188 75. Magandiyaautta I. 508-509 

“ Health 1 * w highest gain, nibbana the highest bliss; 

And of Ways, the Eightfold leads to deathlessness, to security''* 

When this had been said, the wanderer Magandiya spoke thus to 
the Lord: 

“ It is marvellous, good Gotama, it is wonderful, good Gotama, 
how well this is spoken by the good Gotama: 

{ 509 ] ‘ Health is the highest gain , nibbana the highest bliss / 

For I too, good Gotama, have heard of this as having been spoken 
by earlier teachers of teachers of the wanderers: 

* Health is the highest gain , nibbana the highest bliss / 

So that this agrees, good Gotama/’ 

“ But as to what you heard, Magandiya, as having been spoken 
by earlier teachers of teachers of the wanderers: 

* Health is the highest gain, nibbana the highest bliss / 

what is that health, what is that nibbana V* 

When this had been said, the wanderer Magandiya stroked his own 
limbs with his hands and said: “ This is that health, good Gotama, 
this is that nibbana. For I, good Gotama, am at present in good 
health, I have no disease at all.” 

“ Magandiya, it is like 3 a man blind from birth who could not see 
dark or bright shapes, nor green, yellow, red or crimson shapes, who 
could not see what is even or uneven, who could not see the stars, 
who could not see the moons and suns. If he should hear a man 
with vision saying: * Indeed it is pleasing to have a lovely, unstained, 
pure white cloth/ he would walk about searching for a white (cloth). 
But some man might deceive him with a greasy grimy coarse robe, 
saying: “ My good man, this is a lovely, unstained, pure white 
cloth/ and he might take it; having taken it, he might put it on; 
having put it on, he might, in his pride, utter a cry of pride : ‘ Indeed 
it is pleasing to have a lovely, unstained, pure white cloth/ What 
do you think about this, Magandiya ? If that man, blind from 
birth, had known and seen, would he have taken that greasy grimy 


1 MA. ii L 218, for those who get wealth and fame and sons from (reciting) 

verses health is not the highest gain — yet it is higher than these. But for 
anyone who has the happiness of meditation or the Way or the fruits, there is 
no bliss higher than nibb&na. 

* C/. Dkp. 204. 


• As at if. ii 201. 




I. 509-51 1 


189 


To Magandiya 

coarse robe; having taken it, would he have put it on; having put it 
on, would he, in his pride, have uttered the cry of pride : * Indeed it 
is pleasing to have a lovely, unstained, pure white cloth’ ? Or was 
it from faith in the man with vision V f 

“ Not knowing, good Gotama, not seeing, that man, blind from 
birth, might take a greasy grimy coarse robe; having taken it he 
might put it on; having put it on, he might, in his pride, utter a cry of 
pride: [510] * Indeed it is pleasing to have a lovely, unstained, pure 
white cloth.’ It was from faith in the man with vision.” 

“ Even so, Magandiya, wanderers belonging to other sects are 
blind, they are without vision; 1 not knowing health, not seeing 
nibbana, they yet speak this verse: 

‘ Health is the highest gain , nibbana the highest bliss.’ 

But, Magandiya, this verse was uttered in days gone by by per- 
fected ones, fully Self-a wakened Ones: 

* Health is the highest gain y nibbana the highest bliss ; 

And of Ways , the Eightfold leads to deathlessness , to security .* 

This has now come down gradually to the ordinary people. And 
although, Magandiya, this body has become an ill, an imposthume, 
a barb, a misery and a disease, yet of this body that has become an ill, 
an imposthume, a barb, a misery and a disease, you say: ‘ This is that 
health, this is that nibbana.’ So you have not that ariyan vision, 
Magandiya, by which you might know health, might see nibbana.” 

“ I have reliance thus in the good Gotama that he could so teach 
me dhamma that I might know health, might see nibbana.” 

“ Magandiya, it is like a man blind from birth who could not see 
. . . the moons and suns. His friends and acquaintances, kith and 
kin, might procure a physician and surgeon; that physician and 
surgeon might make up a medicine, but fail to provide him with eyes 
with it or clarify his eyes. What do you think about this, Magan- 
diya ? Would that doctor feel much trouble and anxiety ?” 

“ Yes, good Gotama,” 

44 Even so, Magandiya, if I were to teach you dhamma : This is that 
health, this is that nibb&na— you would not know that health, would 
not see that nibbana. It would be a trouble to me, it would be a 
vexation to me.” 

[511] 44 1 have reliance thus in the good Gotama that he could so 
teach me dhamma that I might know health, might see nibbana.” 


1 Said of Pokkharas&ti at M . ii. 202. 




190 75, M&gandiyaauUa I. 511-512 

“ Magandiya, it is like a man blind from birth who could not see 
dark or bright shapes , . „ , But some man might deceive him with 

a greasy grimy coarse robe, saying: * My good man, this is a lovely, 
unstained, pure white cloth/ and he might take it; having taken it, 
he might put it on. His friends and acquaintances, his kith and kin 
might procure a physician and surgeon; that physician and surgeon 
might make up a medicine for him, emetics, 8 purgatives, coliyrium 
(for the eyes), ointments, the nose-treatment.® Because of that 
medicine he might regain his vision, 4 might clarify his eyes. But with 
the regaining of his vision he might get rid of that desire and attach- 
ment to that greasy grimy coarse robe, and he might regard that man 
as no friend, might even regard him as an enemy and consider 
depriving him of life, thinking: ‘ For a long time indeed I have been 
defrauded, deceived, and cheated by this man with a greasy grimy 
coarse robe who said: “ My good man, this is a lovely, unstained, 
pure white cloth/* * 

Even so, Magandiya, if I were to teach you dkamma , saying: 
* This is that health, this is that nibbana/ you might know health, 
might see nibbana. With the arising of your vision, you might get 
rid of that desire and attachment to the five groups of grasping, and 
this might even occur to you: ‘ For a long time indeed I have been 
defrauded, deceived and cheated by this mind for, grasping, I 
grasped after material shape itself . . . after feeling itself . . . after 
perception itself . . . after the habitual tendencies themselves; 
grasping, I grasped after consciousness itself. Conditioned by 
grasping after this, there was becoming for me ; conditioned by 
becoming, birth; conditioned by birth, old age and dying, grief, 
sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair [512] came into being. 
Thus is the origin of this whole mass of anguish/ ” 

“ I have reliance thus in the good Gotama that he could so teach 
me dhamma that I could rise from this seat, not blind/* 

“ Well then, Magandiya, do you consort with true men; if 
you, Magandiya, consort with true men, then will you, Magan- 
diya, hear true dhamma ; if you, Magandiya, hear true dhamma 
then will you, Magandiya, fare along in accordance with dhamma; 
if you, Magandiya, fare along in accordance with dhamma , then 


1 As above, p. 188. 1 The following list also occurs at D. i, 12. 

* As at Yin . i. 204. 

4 cakkhuni ujypadeyya, he might acquire eyes, make them arise. So, in this 
paragraph cakkhuppad& is translated as “ the regaining of his vision 99 and 
in the next as “ the arising of your vision.** 




I. 512-613 To Mdgandiya 191 

will you, Magandiya, know for yourself, then will you see for 
yourself that: * These ills are imposthumes, barbs — but ills, im~ 
posthumes, barbs can be stopped here without remainder; from 
the stopping of grasping after this, there is the stopping of 
becoming for me; from the stopping of becoming, the stopping of 
birth; from the stopping of birth, old age and dying, grief, sorrow, 
suffering, lamentation and despair are stopped. Thus is the stopping 
of this whole mass of anguish.’ ” 

When this had been said, Magandiya the wanderer spoke thus to 
the Lord ; 

“ It is excellent, good Gotama, excellent, good Gotama. It is, 
good Gotama, as if one might set upright what had been upset, or 
might disclose what had been covered, or point out the way to one 
who had gone astray, or might bring an oil-lamp into the darkness 
so that those with vision might see material shapes— even so in many 
a figure has dhamma been made clear by the good Gotama. I am 
going to the revered Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to the 
Order of monks. May I receive the going forth in the revered 
Gotama’s presence, may I receive ordination.” 

“ Magandiya, if a former member of another sect wishes for the 
going forth in this dhamma and discipline, wishes for ordination, he 
undertakes probation for four months. 1 At the end of the four 
months the monks, if they so decide, may let him go forth, may 
ordain him into the status of a monk; but even here differences 
among individuals are known to me.” 

“ If, revered sir, former members of other sects, wishing for 
the going forth in this dhamma and discipline, wishing for ordination, 
undertake probation for four months, and if at the end of the 
four months the monks, if they so decide, let them go forth, ordain 
them into the status of a monk, then will I undertake probation 
for four years; at the end of the four years the monks, if they 
so decide, may let me go forth, may ordain me into the status of a 
monk.” [513] But the wanderer Magandiya received the going 
forth in the Lord’s presence, he received ordination. 

Soon after he was ordained the venerable Magandiya, dwelling 
alone, aloof, diligent, ardent, self-resolute, in no long time having 
realised here and now by his own super-knowledge that matchless 
goal of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men of family 
rightly go forth from home into homelessness, entering on it, abided 


1 As above, p. 59. 



192 75. Magaiidiyasutla I. 513-514 

in it. And he knew: “ Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the 
Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of 
being such or so.” So was the venerable Magandiya one of the 
perfected ones. 

Discourse to Magandiya: 

The Fifth 


76. DISCOURSE TO SANDAKA 

(Sandakasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Kosambi 
in Ghosita’s monastery. Now at that time the wanderer Sandaka 
was staying in the Fig Tree 1 Cave with a great company of wanderers, 
with at least five hundred wanderers. Then the venerable Ananda, 
emerging from solitude towards evening, addressed the monks, 
saying: “ Come, your reverences, we will go to Devaka^a Pool so 
as to see the Cave.” 

“ Yes, your reverence,” these monks answered the venerable 
Ananda in assent. Then the venerable Ananda, together with many 
monks, approached Devakata Pool. Now at that time the wanderer 
Sandaka was sitting down with the great company of wanderers 
shouting out with a loud noise, a great noise, talking various kinds 
of inferior talk, 2 that is to say talk on kings, thieves, great ministers, 
armies, fears, battles, food, drink, clothes, beds, garlands, scents, 
relations, vehicles, villages, market towns, towns, the country, 
women, heroes, streets, wells, those departed before, talk of diversity, 
speculation about the world, speculation about the sea, [514] talk 
about becoming or not becoming thus or thus. The wanderer 
Sandaka saw the venerable Ananda coming in the distance ; seeing 
him, he called his own company to order, saying: 

“ Good sirs, let there be little noise; do not, good sirs, make a 
noise; this is a disciple of the recluse Gotama who is coming — the 
recluse Ananda. For as long as disciples of the recluse Gotama have 

1 Pilakkha, probably ficus infectoria . See Vin . iv. 35. MA. iii. 220 says 
there was a tree of this kind at the entrance to the Cave. 

1 As at Vin . iv. 164. See B.D. iii. 82 /. for references and notes on the 
various kinds of talk. 




I. 514-515 


To Sandaka 


193 


been staying near KosambI the recluse Ananda has been among them. 
These venerable ones wish for little noise, they are trained to little 
noise, they are praisers of little noise. So he may consider approach- 
ing if he knows that this is a company of little noise/’ Then these 
wanderers fell silent. Then the venerable Ananda approached the 
wanderer Sandaka. The wanderer Sandaka spoke thus to the 
venerable Ananda: 

“ Let the revered Ananda come, there is a welcome for the revered 
Ananda ; it is long since the revered Ananda made this opportunity, 1 
that is to say for coming here. Let the revered Ananda sit down, 
this seat is ready.” Then the venerable Ananda sat down on the 
seat that was ready. And the wanderer Sandaka, having taken a 
low seat, sat down at a respectful distance. Then the venerable 
Ananda spoke thus to the wanderer Sandaka as he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance : 

“ What is the talk for which you are now gathered together here, 
Sandaka ? And what was your talk that was interrupted ?” 2 

“ Let be that talk, good Ananda, for which we are now gathered 
together here. It will not be difficult for the good Ananda to 
hear this talk later. It were good if some dhamma-t&Xk belonging 
to his own teacher were to occur to the revered Ananda himself.” 

“ Well then, Sandaka, listen, attend carefully and I will speak.” 

“ Yes, sir,” the wanderer Sandaka answered the venerable Ananda 
in assent. The venerable Ananda spoke thus : 

“ Sandaka, these four ways of living a non-Brahma-faring have 
been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected one, 
fully Self- Awakened One; and four comfortless Brahma-farings have 
been pointed out in which an intelligent man could certainly not live 
a Brahma-faring, or, if living it, could not gain success in the right 
path, in dhamma , in what is skilled.” 

“ And what, good Ananda, are these four ways of living a non- 
Brahma-faring that have been pointed out by the Lord . . . fully 
Self- Awakened One, in which [515] an intelligent man could certainly 
not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living it, could not gain success in the 
right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled ?” 

“ As to this, Sandaka, some teacher speaks thus and is of this 
view : 3 ‘ There is no (result of) gift, no (result of) sacrifice ; there is no 

1 C/. M. i. 326, 481. * As at M. ii. 1-2; D . i. 2; Ud. 11, 31. 

3 Ascribed to Ajita Kesakambalin at />. i. 56; c/. also M. i. 287, 402, 8 . iii. 

206. See translation and notes by A. L. Basham in his History and Doctrines 
of the Ajivikas, London, 1951, p. 15. 



194 


76. Sandakasutta 


I. 515 


fruit or ripening of deeds well done or ill done ; there is not this world, 
there is not a world beyond ; there is not (benefit from serving) mother 
or father; there are no beings of spontaneous uprising; there are not 
in the world recluses and brahmans who are faring rightly, pro- 
ceeding rightly, and who proclaim this world and a world beyond, 
having realised them by their own super-knowledge. This man is 
derived from the four great elements so that, when he passes away, 
th€ earthy part of his body returns and relapses to earth, the fluid 
part to water, the hot part to heat, the windy part to wind, and his 
sense-organs pass over into the ether. Four men, with a bier as the 
fifth, 1 go along taking the corpse ; as far as the cemetery they make 
known his characteristics. 2 His bones become pigeon-grey. Offerings 
end as ashes. It is imbeciles who speak of giving. It is vain, lying, 
empty talk on their part who profess to say: There is. 3 Fools and 
wise alike are annihilated and destroyed at the breaking up of the 
body; after dying they are not.’ 

Wherefore, Sandaka, an intelligent man reflects thus: ‘This 
worthy teacher speaks thus and is of this view: “ There is no (result 
of) gift . . . after dying they are not.” If this is a true word of this 
good teacher, then what is done herein 4 5 is without my doing it, what 
is lived herein is without my living it. Moreover both of us are herein 
on an exact level in attaining recluseship, although I do not say: 
u We will both be annihilated and destroyed at the breaking up of 
the body; after dying we will not be.” It is excessive of this good 
teacher to be naked, shaven, to practise squatting on his heels, to 
pluck out the hair of his head and beard, while I am living in a house 
surrounded and supported by sons, delighting in Kasi’s sandal-wood 
perfumes, decked with garlands, scents and unguents, enjoying the 
use of gold and silver. 6 For in a future state I will be on an exact 
level in wayfaring 8 as this good teacher. Knowing what, seeing 
what, should I fare the Brahma-faring under this teacher V He, 
realising that this is a way of living a non-Brahma-faring, goes away 
uninterested in this Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the first way of living a non-Brahma-faring that 


1 Four men each take a leg of the bier, and so the bier as well. 

2 paddni . 

3 atthikavada , aitirmatists, “ thcre-is-ists.” Here 31 A* iii. 227 takes the 
theory to refer to there being fruit of giving. 

4 eltha . MA. iii. 228: in this reel uses’ dhamma, 

5 C/. A. iii. 391, iv. 281; Ud. 65. 

4 CJ . A. iii. 347, v. J39. 



I. 516-517 


To Sandaka 


195 


has been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected one, 
fully Self-Awakened One, (a way) in which an intelligent man could 
certainly not [516] live a Brahma-faring or, if living it, could not gain 
success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here speaks thus and is of this 
view: 1 * From doing, from making (another) do, from mutilating, 
from making (another) mutilate . . . from that source there is not 
merit, there is not the perpetuating of merit. There is no merit from 
giving, from taming, from restraining, from truth-speaking, there is 
not the perpetuating of merit.’ 

Wherefore, Sandaka, an intelligent man reflects thus: ‘This 
worthy teacher speaks thus and is of this view: “ From doing, from 
making (another) do . . . there is not the perpetuating of merit,” If 
this is a true word of this good teacher, then what is done herein is 
without my doing it, what is lived herein is without my living it. 
Moreover both of us are herein on an exact level in attaining recluse- 
ship, although I do not say: “ Evil will not be done by the deeds of 
both.” It is excessive of this good teacher . . , Knowing what, seeing 
what, should I fare the Brahma-faring under this teacher V He, 
realising that this is a way of living a non-Brahma-faring, goes away 
uninterested in this Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the second way of living a non-Brahma-faring 
. . . could not gain success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is 
skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here speaks thus and is of this 
view: 2 ‘There is no cause, no reason for the defilement of crea- 
tures . . .[517]. , . they experience pleasure and pain amid the six 
classes.’ 

Wherefore, Sandaka, an intelligent man reflects thus: ‘This 
worthy teacher speaks thus and is of this view: “ There is no cause, 
no reason for the defilement of creatures . . . they experience pleasure 
and pain amid the six classes.” If this is a true word of this good 
teacher, then what is done herein is without my doing it, what is 
lived herein is without my living it. Moreover both of us are herein 
on an exact level in attaining recluseship, although I do not say: 
“ We will both be purified without cause, without reason.” It is 
excessive of this good teacher . . . Knowing what, seeing what, should 
I fare the Brahma-faring under this teacher V He, realising that 


1 As at j*f. i. 404; see above, p. 73. Also at 8, iii. 208. 

* As at M. i. 407 ; see above, p. 76. Also at $. iii. 210. 




I. 517 


196 76. Sandaka&uUa 

this is a way of living a non-Brahma-faring, goes away uninterested 
in this Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the third way of living a non-Brahma-faring . . . 
could not gain success in the right path, in dhamnm , in what is 
skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here speaks thus and is of this 
view : l 2 ‘ These seven classes are not made or caused to be made, they 
are not created or caused to be created, they are barren (of results), 
standing stable as a mountain, stable as a pillar,* they do not move or 
change or injure one another, they are unable to affect one another's 
pleasure or pain or pleasure-and-pain. What are the seven ? 
Earth, 3 water, heat, wind, pleasures, pains, life-principles — these 
seven. 4 * These seven classes are not made or caused to be made, 
they are not created . . . they are unable to affect one another's 
pleasure of pain or pleasure-and-pain. Herein there is neither slayer 
nor one that makes another slay, 6 neither hearer 6 nor one that makes 
another hear, neither knower 6 nor one that makes another know. 
Even he who cuts off (another's) head with a sharp sword deprives 
no one of life, for the sword merely penetrates the gap between the 
seven classes. There are these fourteen hundred thousand chief 
kinds of birth, 7 and sixty hundred and six hundred. There are five 
hundred karmas 8 * and (another) five karmas* and (another) three 
karmas. 10 There is a karma 11 and half a karma. 12 There are sixty- 
two practices, sixty-two sub-divisions (in a great kalpa 13 ), six classes 

1 At D. i. 56 ascribed to Pakudha Kaccayana. See also *Sf. iii. 211. 

2 As at D . i. 14. 

3 pathavikdya. MA. iii. 229 says that this is just earth or the aggregation 
of earth; and so for the other 41 elements.” 

4 M . here reads sail 1 ime as against sattame , 44 as the seventh ” of D . i. 56. 

8 Cf. Ill p. 22= Jd. iv. 71=3fi7n, 402. 

* At A. iv. 196 these are among the eight qualities fitting one to go on a 
message. 

7 For a discussion of these terms down to “ great kalpas,” see A. L. Basham, 
op. cit.j p. 240 ff. The following view is ascribed to Makkhali GosUla at D. i, 
53-54. 

8 kammuno . MA. iii. 230: all shown to be useless. 

2 MA. iii. 230=2X4. 162: the five controlling faculties, or sense-organs, 
tndriya. 

10 Of body, speech and thought, MA. iii. 230. 

11 Of body and speech, MA. iii. 230. 12 Of thought, MA. iii. 230. 

13 MA. iii. 230: 44 in each kalpa there are 64 sub-divisions, antarakappa. 

But because he does not know the other two, he (Makkhali GosSla) speaks 
thus,” 



I. 517-518 


To Sandaka 


197 


of mankind, 1 eight stages in (the life of a) man, 2 forty-nine hundred 
inodes of livelihood, forty-nine hundred wanderers, 3 [518] forty-nine 
hundred naga-dwellings, 4 twenty hundred faculties, thirty hundred 
Niraya Hells, thirty-six places where dust collects, seven births 
where there is consciousness, 5 seven births where there is no conscious- 
ness, 8 seven kinds of production where there are joints in the stalk, 7 
seven kinds of devas , 0 seven kinds of men, 9 seven kinds of demons, 
seven lakes, seven knots, 10 seven (greater) mountains, seven hundred 
(smaller) mountains, seven (great) dreams, 11 seven hundred (lesser) 
dreams. There are 84,000 great kalpas in which both fools and the 
wise, when they have run on and circled on, will make an end of 
anguish. It is useless to say: 1 1, by this moral practice or habit or 
austerity or Brahma-faring 12 will bring an unmatured karma to 
maturity, 13 or gradually exhaust karma already matured/ 14 This is 

1 chal-abhijdtiyo. Cf. the corresponding theory of Purana Kassapa at 
A. iii. 383. See also D. iii. 250. Referred to at M. i. 407 as chass-evdbhijati, 
as at M . ii. 222. The black class includes, according to M A. iii. 121, DA. 162, 
3 A. ii. 343 butchers, hunters, fishermen, robbers, etc.; the blue includes 
monks and some wanderers; the red, Jains and wearers of one cloth only; 
the yellow, householders and disciples of unclothed ascetics; the white includes 
Nanda, Vaccha, Sankieca (MA. iii. 121), or it includes Naked Ascetics, men 
and women (DA. 162=&4. ii. 343); the radiant class includes Naked Ascetics 
(MA. iii. 121), or Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Safikicca, Makkhali GosSla (DA. 162= 
8 A. ii. 343). 

2 MA. iii. 230-231 : babyhood, playtime, stage of investigation, standing 
erect, learning time, recluseship, victory (jina f explained by jananakaJa, time 
of knowing) and prostrate time, pannabhumi (translated at K.8. iii. 171, 
n. 2 as “ attainment,” reading pattabhumi , a suggested v.l. at 8 A. ii. 343). 

* Unclothed ascetics — the white; Nanda Vaccha, Saiikicca (MA. iii. 121), 
or Naked Ascetics, men and women (DA. 162=&4. ii. 343); the radiant. Naked 
Ascetics (MA. iii. 121), or Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Sankieca, Makkhali Gosala 
(DA. 162=&4. ii. 343). 

4 ndgdvasa , explained by nagamayyfaUi at MA. iii. 231, circles or groups of 
n5gas. 

6 The Comys say camels, cows, donkeys, goats, cattle, deer, buffaloes. 

4 The Comys say rice, barley, wheat, beans, millet and two other kinds of 

grain. 7 Sugar-cane, bamboo, reeds, etc. 

8 The Comys here say that seven stands for “ many.” 

• Meaning u endless.” 

10 pavuta , see PED. y s.v. MA. iii. 232, ganthikd. Le Canon Pali bond • 
dhique , vol. I, fasc. i, p. 48 does not translate. The meaning is really unknown. 

11 Five dreams of Gotama given at A. iii. 240, Jd. i. 69. 

12 I.e. of unclothed or other ascetics. 

18 This is what a wise man might say. 

14 This is what the fool might say; but he goes on (in samsara) after he has 
passed the time at which this was said, MA. iii. 233. 



198 


76. Sandakasutta 


I. 618-519 


not so. Happiness and pain are measured out (as) in a bushel; 
circling on has its limits fixed ; there is not decline and growth, there 
is not high degree or low. 1 Indeed, just as a ball of thread, when 
thrown down, unwinds itself as it rolls, 2 even so will fools and the 
wise alike, when they have run on and circled on, make an end of 
anguish.’ 

Wherefore, Sandaka, an intelligent man reflects thus : 1 This worthy 
teacher speaks thus and is of this view: “ These seven classes . , . wiU 
make an end of anguish.” If this is a true word of this good teacher, 
then what is done herein is without my doing it, what is lived herein 
is without my living it. Moreover both of us are on an exact level 
in attaining recluseship, although I do not say: “ When we have both 
run on and circled on we will make an end of anguish.” It is 
excessive of this good teacher to be naked, shaven . . . seeing what, 
should I fare the Brahma-faring under this teacher V He, realising 
that this is a way of living a non-Brahma-faring, goes away un- 
interested in that Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the fourth way of living a non-Brahma-faring 
that has been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected 
one, fully Self- Awakened One, and in which an intelligent man could 
certainly not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living it, could not gain 
success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. 

These, Sandaka, are the four ways of living a non-Brahma-faring 
that have been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, [519] and in which an 
intelligent man could certainly not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living 
it, could not gain success in the right path, in dhamma, in what is 
skilled.” 

“ It is wonderful, good Ananda, it is marvellous, good Ananda, 
that although there are these four ways of living a non-Brahma-faring, 
they have been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, as those in which an 
intelligent man could certainly not live a Brahma-faring, or, if 
living it, could not gain success in the right path, in dhamma , in what 
is skilled. But now, good Ananda, what are these four comfortless 
Brahma-farings that have been pointed out by this Lord who knows 
and sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, and in which an 
intelligent man certainly could not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living 

1 samsSra does not decline for the wise man or grow for the fool, MA, 
ill. 233. 

1 It goes on unwinding itself for the length of the thread, MA . iii. 233. 




To Sandaka 


I. 519-520 


199 


it, could not gain success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is 
skilled ?” 

“ As to this, Sandaka, some teacher, all-knowing, 1 2 all-seeing, 
claims all-embracing knowledge-and- vision, saying: c Whether I am 
walking or standing still or asleep or awake, knowledge-and-vision is 
constantly and perpetually before me.’ He enters an empty place, 
and he does not obtain almsfood, and a dog bites him, and he 
encounters a fierce elephant, and he encounters a fierce horse, and 
he encounters a fierce bullock, and he asks a woman and a man their 
name and clan, and he asks the name of a village or a market town 
and the way. He, being one who asks, 2 4 How was this V answers, 
4 1 had to enter an empty place, therefore I entered; I had to obtain 
no almsfood, therefore I obtained none ; (someone) had to be bitten 
by a dog, therefore I was bitten by one ; (someone) had to encounter 
a fierce elephant, horse and bullock, therefore I encountered them; 
(someone) had to ask a woman and a man their name and clan, 
therefore I asked ; (someone) had to ask the name of a village and 
market town and the way, therefore I asked/ 

Whereupon, Sandaka, an intelligent person reflects thus: 4 This 
revered teacher, all-knowing, all-seeing . . . therefore I asked/ 
Having realised that this Brahma-faring is comfortless, he goes away 
uninterested in this Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the first comfortless Brahma-faring that has 
been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected one, 
fully Self-Awakened One, and [520] in which an intelligent man 
certainly could not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living it, could not 
gain success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here depends on report, 3 holds 
to report for his 4 truths/ he teaches dhamma according to report, 4 
according to hearsay and tradition, according to the authority of the 
collections. 5 If a teacher, Sandaka, depends on report, holds to 
report for his ‘ truths,* he remembers (part) well and he remembers 
(part) badly, and is both right and wrong. Wherefore, Sandaka, 
an intelligent person reflects thus: * This worthy teacher depends on 
report . . . and wrong/ Having realised that this Brahma-faring is 
comfortless, he goes away uninterested in this Brahma-faring. 


1 As at M. i. 92-93, ii. 31; A. i. 220. 

2 Being omniscient, why did he ask ? MA, iii. 233. 

3 M . ii. 211. 

4 A . i. 189, 195, ii. 91. 

8 pitaka; cf. M. ii. 169. 



200 76. Sandakasutta I. 520-621 

This, Sandaka, is the second comfortless Brahma-faring . . . 
dhamma , in what is skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here is a reasoner and investi- 
gator; 1 he teaches dhamma on a system of his own devising, beaten 
out by reasoning and based on investigation. If, Sandaka, a 
teacher is a reasoner and investigator, part is well reasoned and part 
is badly reasoned, and is both right and wrong. Wherefore, 
Sandaka, an intelligent person reflects thus: 1 This worthy teacher is 
a reasoner and investigator . . . and wrong.* Having realised that 
this Brahma-faring is comfortless, he goes away uninterested in this 
Brahma-faring. 

This, Sandaka, is the third comfortless Brahma-faring . . . dhamma , 
in what is skilled. 

And again, Sandaka, some teacher here is stupid and confused ; 2 
because of his stupidity and confusion, on being asked a question on 
this or that [521] he falls into equivocation, into eel-wriggling, 3 
* It is not thus for me, 4 it is not so for me, it is not otherwise for me, 
I do not say it is not, I do not say it is not not.’ Wherefore, Sandaka, 
an intelligent person reflects thus : * This worthy teacher is stupid 
and confused ... I do not say that it is not not/ Having realised 
that this Brahma-faring is comfortless, he goes away uninterested 
in this Brahma-faring, 

This, Sandaka, is the fourth comfortless Brahma-faring that has 
been pointed out by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected one, 
fully Self-Awakened One, and in which an intelligent man could 
certainly not live a Brahma-faring, or, if living it, could not gain 
success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. 

These, Sandaka, are the four comfortless Brahma-farings that 
have been pointed out by this Lord . . . could not gain success in the 
right path, in dhamma , in what is skifled.” 

“ It is wonderful, good Ananda, it is marvellous, good Ananda, 
that these four comfortless Brahma-farings have been pointed out 
by this Lord who knows and sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened 
One, as those in which an intelligent man could certainly not live 
a Brahma-faring or, if living it, could not gain success in the right 
path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. Good Ananda, what does this 
Teacher teach, what does he profess whereby an intelligent man 

* Of. M. i. 68; D. i. 16. 

* Cf. D. i. 27. 

a On amardvikkhepa see D. i. 24 ff. 

4 Qn these answers in a particular context see D. j, 27» 



To Sandaka 


I. 521-523 


201 


could certainly live a Brahma-faring and, living it, could gain success 
in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled V 9 

4 ‘ As to this, Sandaka, a Tathagata arises in the world, a perfected 
one, a fully Self- Awakened One, endowed with knowledge and right 
conduct, well-farer, knower of the worlds, matchless charioteer of 
men to be tamed, teacher of devas and men, an Awakened One, a 
Lord. He (. . . as in Kandaraka Sutta, M. i. 344-347 . . .) having 
got rid of these five hindrances — defilements of the mind and weaken- 
ing to intuitive wisdom — aloof from pleasures of the senses, aloof 
from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the first medita- 
tion, which is accompanied by initial thought and discursive thought, 
is bom of aloofness and is rapturous and joyful. If a disciple attains 
such lofty eminence under this Teacher, [522] an intelligent person 
could certainly live that Brahma-faring and, living it, could gain 
success in the right path, in dhamma , in what is skilled. And again, 
Sandaka, a monk, by allaying inital and discursive thought . . . 
enters and abides in the second meditation . . . the third . . . the fourth 
meditation. If a disciple attains such lofty eminence ... could gain 
success in the right path, in dhamma, in what is skilled. 

Thus with the mind composed (. . . as in Kandaraka Sutta, M. i. 
347-349) ... he comprehends: Destroyed is birth, brought to a close 
the Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of 
being such or so. If a disciple attains such lofty eminence under 
this Teacher, an intelligent person could certainly live that Brahma- 
faring and, living it, could gain success in the right path, in dhamma , 
in what is skilled.” 

“ But, good Ananda, could that monk who is a perfected one, the 
cankers destroyed, who has lived the life, done what was to be done, 
laid down the burden, attained his own goal, the fetters of becoming 
utterly destroyed, freed by perfect profound knowledge — [523] could 
he enjoy pleasures of the senses ?” 

44 Whatever monk, Sandaka, is a perfected one 1 * . . . freed by 
perfect profound knowledge, he cannot become one to transgress* 

five points : 3 a monk whose cankers are destroyed cannot become one 
intentionally to deprive a living creature of life ... to take what has 
not been given, as it were by theft ... to indulge in sexual intercourse 
... to speak a deliberate lie . . . to enjoy pleasures of the senses in 


1 As at A. iv. 369-370. 

* ajjhdcaritum , to practise (wrongly), to commit. 

5 CJ. D. iii. 133, 235. 



202 


76. SandaJcasutta 


I. 523-524 


regard to what was stored 1 as he did formerly when in the household 
state. Sandaka, whatever monk is a perfected one . . . freed by 
perfect profound knowledge he cannot become one to transgress 
these five points.” 

“ But, good Ananda, if a monk is one perfected , . . freed by perfect 
profound knowledge, then, whether he is walking or standing still or 
asleep or awake is the knowledge-and-vision constantly and per- 
petually present that his cankers are destroyed ?” 

“ Well then, Sandaka, I will make you a simile, for by a simile some 
intelligent persons here understand the meaning of what has been 
said. Sandaka, it is like a man whose hands and feet have been cut 
off; whether he is walking or standing still or asleep or awake, 
constantly and perpetually are his hands and feet as though cut off; 
and moreover while he is reflecting on it, he knows: 6 My hands and 
feet have been cut off/ Even so, Sandaka, whatever monk is a 
perfected one, the cankers destroyed, who has lived the life, done 
what was to be done, laid down the burden, attained his own goal, 
the fetters of becoming utterly destroyed, freed by perfect profound 
knowledge, for him whether he is walking or standing still or asleep 
or awake, the cankers are as though destroyed ; and moreover while 
he is reflecting on it, he knows: 4 My cankers are destroyed/ ” 

u How many great leaders, 2 good Ananda, are there in this dhamma 
and discipline ?” 

44 Not merely a hundred, nor two, three, four or five hundred, 
but far more are those who are great leaders in this dhamma and 
discipline.” 

44 Wonderful, good Ananda, marvellous, good Ananda; there can 
be no extolling of their own dhamma nor disparaging of the dhamma 
of others; but both the teaching of dhamma in its (whole). extent 3 
and so [ 524 ] many great leaders can be seen. On the other hand, 
these Naked Ascetics are children of a childless mother, they both 
extol themselves and disparage others, and they show only three 
great leaders, namely Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Sankieea and Makkhali 
Oosala.” 4 

Then the wanderer Sandaka addressed his own company, saying: 
“ Let the good sirs fare forth; the living of the Brahma-faring is 

1 sannidhikdrakam . C/. Pac. 38 ( Fin. iv. 86-87), and see B.D. ii. 339, n, 1 ; 
and also O.S « iv. 245, n, 8. 

* niyyatdro. 

8 ayatane can also mean “ practice.” 

4 Mentioned at if. i. 238. 



I. 524 II. 1-2 


To Sandaka 


203 


under the recluse Gotama, although it is not easy for us now to 
give up gains, honours, fame/’ 

It was in this way that the wanderer Sandaka sent his own company 
into the Lord’s Brahma-faring. 

Discourse to Sandaka: 

The Sixth 1 


77. GREATER DISCOURSE TO SAKULUDAYIN 

(Maha-Sakuludayisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding place. 2 Now at that 
time a number of very celebrated wanderers, such as Anugara, 3 
Varadhara and the wanderer Sakuludayin, and other celebrated 
wanderers, were staying in the wanderers’ park at the peacocks* 
feeding place. Then the Lord, having dressed in the morning, taking 
his bowl and robe, entered Rajagaha for almsfood. Then it occurred 
to the Lord: u It is too early to walk for almsfood in Rajagaha. 
Suppose I were to approach the wanderers’ park, the peacocks’ 
feeding place and the wanderer Sakuludayin V* Then the Lord 
approached the peacocks’ feeding place in the wanderers’ park. 
Now at that time the wanderer Sakuludayin was sitting down with 
the great company of wanderers shouting out with a loud noise, a 
great noise, talking various kinds of inferior talk . . . [2] . . . 4 The 
Lord spoke thus to the wanderer Sakuludayin as he was sitting down 

at a respectful distance: 

“ What is the talk for which you are now gathered together here, 
Udayin ? And what was your talk that was interrupted ?” 


1 Here ends Trenckner, Majjhima - Nikdya , vol. I. * Cf. M. Sta. 79. 

* M A. iii. 235 calls him Annabhara. A wanderer of this name is referred 

to at A. ii. 29, 176, with the other two mentioned above. 

4 As in the Sandaka Sutta , above, p. 192. For Sandaka read Sakuludayin, 
and for Ananda read the Lord. 




204 77, Makd-Sakuludayisutta II. 2-3 

“ Let be that talk, revered sir, for which we are now gathered 
together here. It will not be difficult for the Lord to hear this talk 
later. Some time ago, 1 revered sir, when divers members of other 
sects, recluses and brahmans, were gathered together and were sitting 
down in the debating hall, 2 this chance conversation arose : * Indeed 
it is profitable for the people of Anga-Magadha, indeed it is well 
gotten by the people of Anga-Magadha that these leaders in religious 
life, heads of companies, heads of groups, teachers of groups, well 
known, famous founders of sects, held In high repute by the many- 
folk, 3 have come to Rajagaha for the rains-residence. This Purana 
Kassapa is the head of a company, head of a group, the teacher of a 
group, he is well known, the famous founder of a sect, held in high 
repute by the manyfolk; he has come to Rajagaha for the rains- 
residence. This Makkhali Gosala too ... This Ajita of the hair- 
blanket too . . . This Pakudha Kaceayana too . . . This Saiijaya 
Belatthi’s son too — This Nataputta the Jain too is the head of a 
company, head of a group, the teacher of a group, [3] he is well known, 
the famous founder of a sect, held in high repute by the manyfolk; 
he too has come to Rajagaha for the rains-residence. This recluse 
Gotama too is the head of a company, head of a group, the teacher of 
a group, he is well known, the famous founder of a sect, held in high 
repute by the manyfolk; he too has come to Rajagaha for the rains- 
residence. Now of these lords, heads of companies, heads of groups, 
teachers of groups, well known, famous founders of sects, held in 
high repute by the manyfolk, which is revered, respected, esteemed, 
honoured by disciples ? And how do disciples, revering and respect- 
ing, live in dependence V 

Some of those who were there spoke thus: * This Purana Kassapa 
is the head of a company, head of a group . . . held in high repute by 
the manyfolk. But he is not revered, respected, esteemed, honoured 
by disciples, nor do disciples, revering and respecting him, live in 
dependence on Purana Kassapa. Once upon a time Purana Kassapa 
was teaching dhamma to an innumerable assembly. But a certain 
disciple of his let it be heard : “ Do not, good sirs, ask Purana 
Kassapa about this matter; he does not know about it, we know 
about it. Ask us about this matter, we can explain it to the good 
sirs/* Once upon a time Purana Kassapa, with outstretched arms 

1 puritndni divasani purimatarani , as at M, ii. 31. 

4 hutuhalaadla; cf . D. 1. 179, S. iv, 398. 

8 As at if. i. 198. The TathSgata is honoured in this sense by wise people, 
MA. iti. 230. 



II. 3-5 To Sakuludayin (Oreater) 205 

and wailing, did not get the chance (to say 1 ): " Let the good sirs be 
quiet; do not, good sirs, make a noise. These are not asking the 
good sirs, they are asking us, we will explain to them.” Then many of 
Purana Kassapa’s disciples, having refuted him, on seceding, 2 said : 
“ You do not understand 3 this dhamma and discipline, I understand 
this dhamma and discipline. How can you understand this dhamma 
and discipline ? You are faring along wrongly, I am faring along 
rightly. There is sense in what I say, no sense in what you say. 
You said at the end what should have been said at the beginning, 
and said at the beginning what should have been said at the end. 
Your method is reversed, 4 * you are refuted, 3 you are caught out, 6 go 
away and think out your words, 7 or unravel them if you can.” So 
Pftraoa Kassapa is not revered, respected, esteemed, honoured by 
disciples, nor do disciples, revering and respecting, live in dependence 
on Purana Kassapa. On the contrary, Purana Kassapa is reviled 
with abuse for his behaviour.’ 8 

[4] Some spoke thus: * This Makkhali Gosala too . . . This Ajita of 
the hair blanket too . . . This Pakudha Kaccayana too . . . Tliis 
Sanjaya Belatthi’s son too . . . This Nataputta the Jain too is the 
head of a company, head of a group ... is not revered, respected, 
esteemed, honoured by disciples, nor do disciples, revering and 
respecting, live in dependence on Nataputta the Jain. On the 
contrary, Nataputta the Jain is reviled with abuse for his behaviour.’ 

Some spoke thus: * This recluse Gotama is the head of a company, 
head of a group, the teacher of a group, he is well known, the famous 
founder of a sect, held in high repute by the manyfolk. He is revered , 
respected, esteemed, honoured by disciples; and disciples, revering 
and respecting the recluse Gotama, live in dependence on him. 
Once upon a time the recluse Gotama was teaching dhamma to an 
innumerable assembly. Then a certain disciple of the recluse 
Gotama coughed. A fellow Brahma-farer touched him with his 
knee and said: [5] “ Let the venerable one be quiet; let the venerable 
one make no noise. The Teacher, our Lord, is teaching dhamma .” 


1 na labhali. Chalmers: “ remonstrated.” 

* Some became householders, some came into this teaching, M A. iii. 237. 

8 Cf. following with D. i. 8 , S. iii. 12. 4 avicinnan te vipardvattam. 

4 dropito te vado . Cf. Vin. i. 60, S. i. 160. • niggahlto 'si. 

1 extra vadappamokkhaya. Cf. itivadappamokkhd n isa msa at M. i. 133, 

S. v. 73, A. ii. 26. 

4 akkuttho dhammakkosena . MA. iii. 237 says that dhamma is sabham , 

nature, disposition, behaviour. 



206 77. Maha-Sakuluddyisutta II. 6-6 

At tlie time when the recluse Gotama was teaching dhamma to. an 
innumerable assembly, there was the sound neither of expectoration 
nor of coughing among his disciples. 1 Any group of people who 
were waiting were ready for him, thinking: “We will hear that 
dhamma that the Lord will teach us." It is as though a man at a 
crossing on a high road might press out a little pure honey,* and any 
group of people who were waiting might be ready for him. Even so 
at the time when the recluse Gotama was teaching dhamma to an 
innumerable assembly, there was the sound neither of expectoration 
nor of coughing among his disciples. Any group of people who were 
waiting were ready for him, thinking: “ We will hear that dhamma 
that the Lord will teach us.” And those disciples of the reclusp 
Gotama who, quarrelling with fellow Brahma-farers and disavowing 
the training, return to the secular life, even these are speakers in 
praise of the Teacher, they are speakers in praise of dhamma and 
speakers in praise of the Order. They censure only themselves, they 
do not censure others, but say: “ It is we ourselves that are un- 
fortunate, it is we that are of little merit, in that we, although we 
have gone forth thus in this dhamma and discipline that are well 
taught, are unable for as long as life lasts to fare the Brahma-faring 
wholly complete, wholly purified.” These, becoming monastery 
attendants or lay-disciples, live undertaking the five rules of training. 
Thus it is that the recluse Gotama is revered, respected, esteemed, 
honoured by disciples, and that disciples, revering and respecting the 
recluse Gotama, live in dependence on him.’ ” 

“ But how many things do you behold in me, Udayin, for which 
my disciples revere, respect, esteem and honour me, and revering and 
respecting, live in dependence (on me) ?” 

“ I, revered sir, behold five things for which disciples revere . . . 
honour the Lord, and, revering and respecting, live in dependence. 
What are the five ? Revered sir, the Lord eats little and speaks in 
praise of eating little. That the Lord eats little and speaks in praise 
of eating little, this is the first thing that I, revered sir, behold in the 
Lord for which disciples revere . . . honour the Lord, and . . . live 
in dependence. 

[6] And again, revered sir, the Lord is contented with any kind of 
robe-material and speaks in praise of content with any kind of robe- 
material. This is the second thing ... for which disciples revere 
. . . honour the Lord, and . . . live in dependence. 


* Cf : M. ii. 122. 


* Cf. D. iii. 85. 



II. 6-7 To Saktduddyin (Greater) 207 

And again, revered sir, the Lord is contented with any kind of 
almsfood and speaks in praise of content with any kind of almsfood. 
This is the third thing ... for which disciples revere , . . honour the 
Lord, and . . . live in dependence. 

And again, revered sir, the Lord is contented with any kind of 
lodgings and speaks in praise of content with any kind of lodgings. 
This is the fourth thing that I behold ... for which disciples revere 
. . . honour the Lord, and . . . live in dependence. 

And again, revered sir, the Lord is aloof 1 and speaks in praise of 
aloofness. That the Lord is aloof and speaks in praise of aloofness, 
this is the fifth thing that I, revered sir, behold in the Lord for which 
disciples revere, respect, esteem and honour the Lord and, revering 
and respecting, live in dependence. 

These, revered sir, are the five things I behold in the Lord for which 
disciples revere . . . honour the Lord and, revering and respecting, 
live in dependence.” 

“ ‘ The recluse Gotama eats little and speaks in praise of eating 
little ’—if it were for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere, 
respect, esteem and honour me and, revering and respecting, would 
live in dependence, there are disciples of mine, Udayin, who live on 
a saucer of food and on half a saucer of food and on a fruit of the 
vilva tree and on half a fruit of the vilva tree. [7] But I, Udayin, 
sometimes eat to the full of this bowl, and I eat more than that. 2 
4 The recluse Gotama eats little and speaks in praise of eating little * 
— if it were for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere . . . and 
honour me and, revering and respecting, would live in dependence, 
it would not be, Udayin, those of my disciples who live on a saucer 
of food and on half a saucer of food and on a fruit of the vilva tree 
and on half a fruit of the vilva tree who would revere, respect, esteem 
and honour me for this behaviour 3 (of mine) and, revering and 
respecting, would live in dependence. 

* The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of robe-material and 
speaks in praise of content with any kind of robe-material* — if it were 

for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere. . . and honour me and, 
revering and respecting, would live in dependence, there are disciples 
of mine, Udayin, who are wearers of rag-robes taken from a dust- 
heap, and who wear robes that are worn thin ; collecting shreds of 

1 MA . iii. 238 says the wanderer means no more than aloof in body, but 

the Lord is aloof with the three forms of aloofness (cf. Vism . 140, SnA, 209, 
616, DA . 169, MA, ii. 143, Asl 164). 

a Cf. Miln . 213, Vism. 170. * dhammena. See above, p. 205, n, 8. 



208 77. Maha-Sakuluddyisutta II. 7-8 

cloth from a cemetery, a rubbish heap or shop and having made up 
an outer cloak, they wear it. I, Udayin, sometimes wear house- 
holders’ robe-material, strengthening it if it is worn thin with thread 
from the white gourd. 4 The recluse Gotama is content with any 
kind of robe-material and speaks in praise of content with any kind 
of robe-material * — if it were for this, Udayin, that disciples would 
revere . . . and honour me and, revering and respecting, would live 
in dependence, it would not be, Udayin, those of my disciples who 
are wearers of rag-robes taken from a dust-Leap, and. who wear 
robes that are worn thin; or those who, collecting shreds of cloth 
from a cemetery, a rubbish heap or shop and who, having made up an 
outer cloak, wear it, who would revere, respect, esteem, honour me 
for this behaviour (of mine) and, revering and respecting, would live 
in dependence. 

4 The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of almsfood and 
speaks in praise of content with any kind of almsfood ’ — if it were 
for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere , . . and honour me and, 
revering and respecting, would live in dependence, there are disciples 
of mine, Udayin, who eat only what is received into the begging 
bowl, 1 who walk on an uninterrupted alms-round, pleased with 
scraps of food;* these, having gone in amid the houses, even if 
offered a seat do not consent (to accept it). But I, Udayin, some- 
times eat where I am invited: rice, rice-gruel, [8] rice from which the 
black grains have been removed, 3 a variety of curries, a variety of 
condiments. 4 The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of 
almsfood and speaks in praise of content with any kind of almsfood * 
— if it were for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere . . . and 
honour me and, revering and respecting, would live in dependence, 
it would not be, Udayin, those of my disciples who eat only what is 
received into the begging-bowl, who walk on an uninterrupted alms- 
round, pleased with scraps of food, and who, having gone in amid the 
houses, even if offered a seat do not consent (to accept it), who would 
revere . , . and honour me for this behaviour (of mine) and, revering 
and respecting, would live in dependence. 

‘ The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of lodging and 
speaks in praise of content with any kind of lodging * — if it were for 
this, Udayin, that disciples would revere . . . and honour me and, 
revering and respecting, would live in dependence, there are disciples 

1 Cf. Viarn . 66, 67. 

1 ncchepake vale rata . MA, iii. 240, reading va te, has bhatte as a variant 
reading. * Cf D . i. 106. 



II. 8-9 


209 


To Sakuludayin (Greater) 

of mine, Udayin, who live at the roots of trees, in the open air, and 
who for eight months do not go under a roof. But I, Udayin, 
sometimes stay in gabled houses, smeared inside and out, sheltered 
from the winds, having door-bolts that fasten and windows that 
close. ‘ The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of lodging and 
speaks in praise of content with any kind of lodging ’ — if it were for 
this, Udayin, that disciples would revere . . . and honour me and, 
revering and respecting, would live in dependence, it would not be, 
Udayin, those of my disciples who live at the roots of trees, in the 
open air, and who for eight months do not go under a roof, who 
would revere . . . and honour me for this behaviour (of mine) and, 
revering and respecting, would live in dependence. 

‘ The recluse Gotama is aloof and speaks in praise of aloofness 9 — 
if it were for this, Udayin, that disciples would revere, respect, 
esteem and honour me and, revering and respecting, would live in 
dependence, there are disciples of mine, Udayin, who have gone to 
remote lodgings in the forest and who, having plunged into remote 
lodgings in forest and jungle, stay there; these return to the midst of 
the Order every half-month for the recitation of the Obligations. 1 
But I, Udayin, sometimes stay crowded round by monks and nuns, 
men and women lay-disciples, by kings and kings’ chief ministers, by 
leaders and disciples of other sects. ‘ The recluse Gotama is aloof 
and speaks in praise of aloofness ’ — [ 9 ] if it were for this, Udayin, 
that disciples would revere . . . and honour me and, revering and 
respecting, would live in dependence, it would not be, Udayin, those 
of my disciples who have gone to remote lodgings in the forest and 
who, having plunged into remote lodgings in forest and jungle, stay 
there, but who return to the midst of the Order every half-month for 
the recitation of the Obligations, who would revere . . . and honour 
me for this behaviour (of mine) and, revering and respecting, would 
live in dependence. 

It is thus, Udayin — for these five ways of behaving — that disciples 
do not revere, respect, esteem and honour me and, revering and 
respecting, live in dependence. 

But there are, Udayin, five other things for which disciples revere 
. . . and honour me and, revering and respecting, live in dependence. 
What are the five ? As to this, Udayin, disciples of mine admire the 
higher morality, and think: ‘ The recluse Gotama is of moral habit, 
he is possessed of the most excellent body of moral habit.* Inas- 


1 pdtimokkha . 




210 77. Mahd-Sakuluddt/isuUa II. 9-10 

much, Udayin, as disciples of mine admire the higher morality, and 
think: * The recluse Gotama is of moral habit, he is possessed of the 
most excellent body of moral habit * — this is the first thing, Udayin, 
for which disciples of mine revere . . . and honour me and, revering 
and respecting, live in dependence. 

And again, Udayin, disciples of mine admire the surpassing know- 
ledge-and-vision, and think: 4 When the recluse Gotama says: I 
know, I see — it is because he does know, does see. The recluse 
Gotama teaches dhamma from super-knowledge, not without super- 
knowledge; the recluse Gotama teaches dhamma that has a causal 
basis 1 , not without a causal basis ; the recluse Gotama teaches dhamma 
that is convincing, 2 not unconvincing.* Inasmuch, Udayin, as 
disciples of mine admire the surpassing knowledge-and-vision, and 
think: * When the recluse Gotama says . . . teaches dhamma that is 
convincing, not unconvincing * — this is the second thing, Udayin, for 
which [10] disciples of mine revere . . . and honour me and, revering 
and respecting, live in dependence. 

And again, Udayin, disciples of mine admire the higher wisdom, 
and the situation does not occur when they think: * The recluse 
Gotama is wise; he is endowed with the most excellent body of 
wisdom. (Yet) he will not see (in advance) a future way of speech 3 
nor will he refute with dhamma 4 a present opposed teaching that is 
rightly (to be) refuted.’ What do you think about this, Udayin ? 
Could disciples of mine, knowing thus, seeing thus, interrupt a chance 
conversation V 9 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ It is not I, Udayin, that expect instruction from disciples; on the 
contrary, it is the disciples themselves that expect instruction from 
me. 5 So that, Udayin, the situation does not occur when disciples 

1 Cf. A . i. 276, cited at Kvu. 661. Cf. Mhvs. in. 51. Sanidana is explained 
at MA. iii. 241 as sappaccaya; for the teaching is causal: sahetuham pana 
lam dcsanam halva. 

* sappdtihariya , explained at MA. iii. 241 as sakdrana. See O.S. i. 264, 
n. 3, and CPD. s.v. appalihariya , “ not convincing, without arguments.” 
The meaning is perhaps: he teaches a reliable dhamma; cf. D. ii. 104. See also 
appatihirahata at D. i. 193, 239, “ witless ” or “ unreliable.” 

* vadapatha , perhaps “ line of argument.” 

4 saha dhammena , explained at MA. iii. 242 as sakdranena. Cf. MA. 
iii. 241 : sakaranam in explanation of sappdpihdriyarh . Therefore saha 
dhammena may mean here: with convincing arguments, or sound argument, 
i.e. well presented. 

* Cf. Vin . ii. 187: “disciples do not protect me in regard to knowledge- 
and-vision and I do not expect protection from disciples as regards this.” 



II. 10-11 To Sakuluddy in (Greater) 211 

of mine who admire the higher wisdom think: * He would neither see 
(in advance) a future way of speech nor would he refute with dhamma 
a present opposed teaching that is rightly (to be) refuted/ This is 
the third thing, Udayin, for which disciples of mine revere . . . and 
honour me and, revering and respecting, live in dependence. 

And again, Udayin, those disciples of mine who are beset by some 
anguish, overwhelmed by anguish, having approached me, ask about 
the ariyan truth of anguish. On being asked by them about the 
ariyan truth of anguish, I explain. I bend my mind to the answer to 
their question. They ask me about the ariyan truth of the uprising 
of anguish, of the stopping of anguish, of the course leading to the 
stopping of anguish. On being asked by them about the ariyan 
truth leading to the stopping of anguish, I explain. I bend my mind 
to the answer to their question. This is the fourth thing, Udayin, 
[11] for which disciples of mine revere . . . and honour me and, 
revering and respecting, live in dependence. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the four applica- 
tions of mindfulness. 1 Herein, Udayin, a monk fares along contem- 
plating the body in the body, ardent, clearly conscious (of it), mindful 
(of it), so as to control the covetousness and dejection in the world 
. . . the feelings in the feelings . . . the mind in the mind ... he fares 
along contemplating mental objects in mental objects, ardent, 
clearly conscious (of them), mindful (of them), so as to control the 
covetousness and dejection in the world. As to this, many of my 
disciples abide attained to accomplishment and to going beyond 
through super-knowledge. 2 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for dis- 
ciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the four right 
strivings. 3 Herein, Udayin, a monk generates desire, he endeavours, 
stirs up energy, exerts his mind and strives for the non-arising of evil 
unskilled states of mind that have not arisen ... for the getting rid 

1 See M . Sta. 10. 

2 abhiniidvosdnapdramipjxifta , as at A, iii. 9; c/. M. ii. 211. Lamotte, 
Mppi. ii. 701 says: para . . . veut dire * l’autre rive mi veut dire . . . 

‘ arriver a.’ So, param.l, pdramitd, means that having realised perfection or 
excellence,' one then arrives beyond on the Further Shore =amata (deathless- 
ness) and nibbana. Cf. MA. iii. 453 which uses the compound nibbanappatta. 
The Beyond, or Further Shore, is where there is no reaction to sensory impinge- 
ment, where “ all is still ” (Sn, 920); the gaining of such a state is a fruit of 
intense meditative exercises. 

3 As at *4. ii. 15, 250, etc. 



77. Maha-Sakuludayisutta 


II. 11-12 


of evil unskilled states of mind that have arisen ... for the arising of 
skilled states of mind that have not arisen ... for the maintenance, 
preservation, increase, maturity, development and completion of 
skilled states of mind that have arisen. As to this, many of my 
disciples abide attained to accomplishment and to going beyond 
through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the four bases of 
psychic power. 1 Herein, Udayin, a monk cultivates the basis of 
psychic power that is possessed of concentration of intention with 
activities of striving . . . that is possessed of concentration of 
energy with activities of striving . . . that is possessed of con- 
centration of consciousness with activities of striving . . . that is 
possessed of concentration of investigation with activities of striving. 
As to this, many of my disciples abide attained to accomplishment 
and to going beyond through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the five control- 
ling faculties. 2 Herein, [12] Udayin, a monk develops the controlling 
faculty of faith, leading to tranquillity, leading to awakening; he 
develops the controlling faculty of energy ... of mindfulness ... of 
concentration ... he develops the controlling faculty of wisdom, 
leading to tranquillity, leading to awakening. As to this, many of 
my disciples abide attained to accomplishment and to going beyond 
through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the five powers. 
Herein, Udayin, a monk develops the power of faith, leading to 
tranquillity, leading to awakening; he develops the power of energy 
... the power of mindfulness ... the power of concentration ... he 
develops the power of wisdom, leading to tranquillity, leading to 
awakening. As to this, many of my disciples abide attained . . . 
through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the seven limbs 


1 As at M. i. 103 ( M.L.S. i. 147). 

* Cf. S. v. 227, etc. On indriya, see PED, They correspond to the five 
powers (immediately below). Indriya appears to be connected with Vedic 
Indra, Pali inda, lord, ruler. The five would therefore seem to be not so much 
“moral faculties” (B.H.S.D.) as ruling faculties, controlling forces, controls, 
but I have elsewhere, in this translation, rendered sarhvara by “ control,” 
csp. pdtimokkhasamvara . 




II. 12-13 


213 


To Saktduddyin (Greater) 

of awakening. 1 Herein, Udayin, a monk develops mindfulness as a 
limb of awakening and which is dependent on aloofness, dependent 
on dispassion, dependent on stopping, ending in renunciation; he 
develops investigation of dhamma as a limb of awakening . . . energy 
. . . rapture . . . serenity . . . concentration . . . even-mindedness as a 
limb of awakening and which is dependent on aloofness, dependent 
on dispassion, dependent on stopping, ending in renunciation. As 
to this, many of my disciples abide attained . . . through super- 
knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the ariyan 
eightfold Way. Herein, Udayin, a monk develops perfect view, he 
develops perfect intention . . . perfect speech . . . perfect action . . , 
perfect mode of livelihood . . . perfect endeavour , . . perfect mind- 
fulness . . . perfect concentration. As to this, many of my disciples 
abide attained . . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the eight 
Deliverances. 2 * Being in the fine-material sphere, he sees material 
shapes ; this is the first deliverance. Not perceiving material shape 
internally he sees external material shapes; this is the second 
deliverance. By thinking of the Fair,® he is intent on it; this is the 
third deliverance. [13] By passing quite beyond perceptions of 
material shapes, by the going down of perceptions of sensory 
reactions, by not attending to perceptions of variety, thinking: 

‘ Ether is unending/ entering on the plane of infinite ether, he abides 
in it; this is the fourth deliverance. By passing quite beyond the 
plane of infinite ether, thinking : 4 Consciousness is unending/ entering 
on the plane of infinite consciousness, he abides in it; this is the fifth 
deliverance. By passing quite beyond the plane of infinite conscious- 
ness, thinking: 4 There is not anything/ entering on the plane of 
no-thing, he abides in it; this is the sixth deliverance. By passing 
quite beyond the plane of no-thing, entering on the plane of neither- 
perception-nor-non-perception, he abides in it; this is the seventh 
deliverance. By passing quite beyond the plane of neither- 
perception-nor-non-perception, entering on the stopping of percep- 
tion and feeling, he abides in it; this is the eighth deliverance. As 

1 Of. MA.ll (M.L.S. i. 15). * See D. ii. 70. 

3 By concentrating in meditation on tho perfectly pure and bright colours 

as the objects of kasirm (for kasina , see below, p. 215). Also, according to 

MA. iii. 256 =j DA. 513, quoting Pps , ii. 30, by way of the four bmhmavihdras . 



214 77. Mahd-Sahduddyisutta II. 13-14 

to this, many of my disciples abide attained to accomplishment and 
to going beyond through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the eight spheres 
of mastery. 1 * * Perceiving material shape internally, one sees external 
material shapes, small, comely, ugly, and he is one perceiving thus: 

* Having mastered them, I know, I see ’ ; this is the first sphere of 
mastery. Perceiving material shape internally, another sees external 
material shapes, illimitable, comely, ugly, and he is one perceiving 
thus: * Having mastered them, I know, I see this is the second 
sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape internally, another 
sees external material shapes, small, comely, ugly, and he is one 
perceiving thus : * Having mastered them, I know, I see ’ ; this is the 
third sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape internally, 
another sees external material shapes, illimitable, comely, ugly, and 
he is one perceiving thus: * Having mastered them, I know, I see 
this is the fourth sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape 
internally, another sees external material shapes that are blue- 
green,* blue-green in colour, blue-green in appearance, reflecting 
blue-green. As the flax blossom is blue-green, blue-green in colour, 
blue-green in appearance, reflecting blue-green; or again, as that fine 
muslin of Benares, of delicate finish on both sides, is blue-green . . . 
reflecting blue-green, even so anyone who, not perceiving material 
shape internally, sees external material shapes that are blue-green, 
blue-green in colour, blue-green in appearance, reflecting blue-green, 
is one perceiving thus: 4 Having mastered them, I know, I see * ; this 
is the fifth [14] sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape 
internally, another sees external material shapes that are yellow, 
yellow in colour, yellow in appearance, reflecting yellow. As the 
karinikara blossom is yellow ... or again, as that fine muslin of 
Benares, of delicate finish on both sides, is yellow . . . even so anyone 
. . . perceiving thus: * Having mastered them, I know, I see 1 ; this is 
the sixth sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape inter- 


1 abhibhayatana ; see D. ii. 110, A . i. 40, iv. 305, etc.; also see Dhs. §204 and 

Bud. Psych. Ethics , note on §204. 

4 These colours: blue-green, yellow, red, white, refer to personal colours: 
blue-green (or dark blue) to the hair or bile, etc.; yellow to skin or soles and 

palms, etc.; red to the flesh or blood or tongue, etc.; white to the bones or 
teeth or nails. These stages of meditative mastery are called parihamma (at 
e.g . MA. iii. 257), “ preparatory,” ».«. to attainment-concentration, appand- 
samddhi. 



II. 14-15 


215 


To Sahuluidyin (Greater) 

nally, another sees external material shapes that are red, red in 
colour, red in appearance, reflecting red. As the bandhujtvaka 
blossom is red ... or again, as that fine muslin of Benares, of delicate 
finish on both sides, is red . . . even so anyone ... is one perceiving 
thus: ‘ Having mastered them, I know, I see this is the seventh 
sphere of mastery. Not perceiving material shape internally, another 
sees external material shapes that are white, white in colour, white 
in appearance, reflecting white. As the morning star is white, 
white in colour, white in appearance, reflecting white, or again, as 
that fine muslin of Benares, of delicate finish on both sides, is white, 
white in colour, white in appearance, reflecting white, even so 
anyone who, not perceiving material shape internally, sees external 
material shapes that are white, white in colour, white in appearance, 
reflecting white, is one perceiving thus : ‘ Having mastered them, I 
know, I see ’ ; this is the eighth sphere of mastery. As to this, many 
of my disciples abide attained to accomplishment and to going 
beyond through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the ten spheres 
of the devices. 1 One is aware of the earth-device above, below, 
across, undivided, illimitable; another is aware of the water-device 
. . . another of the fire-device . . . another of the wind-device . . . 
another of the blue-green device . . . another of the yellow device 
. . . another of the red device . . . another of the white device . . . 
another of the space device . . . another [15] of the consciousness 
device above, below, across, undivided, illimitable. As to this, 
many of my disciples abide attained . . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine develop the four medita- 
tions. Herein, Udayin, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the senses, 
aloof from unskilled states of mind, enters and abides in the first 
meditation which is accompanied by initial thought and discursive 
thought, is born of aloofness, and is rapturous and joyful. He 
drenches, 2 saturates, permeates, suffuses this very body with the 
rapture and joy that are born of aloofness; there is no part of his 
whole body that is not suffused with the rapture and joy that are 


1 kasinayatana. As at A . v. 46. See 0,8. v. 31, n. 1, and Viam. 97, 110. 
The kasina are purely external devices used in meditation exercises to produce 
and develop concentration and attain the four jhana. 

2 This exposition of the four meditations with the similes has occurred 
at M. i. 276-278 (M.L.8. i. 330/.); and see D. i. 73# 



216 77. MaM-Sakttiuddyisvtta II. 16-16 

bom of aloofness. Udayin, as a skilled bath-attendant or his 
apprentice, having sprinkled bath-powder into a bronze vessel, 
might knead it together with drops of water until the ball of lather has 
taken up moisture, is drenched with moisture, suffused with moisture 
inside and out, but there is no oozing — even so, Udayin, does a monk 
drench, saturate, permeate, suffuse this very body with the rapture 
and joy that are bom of aloofness ; there is no part of his whole body 
that is not suffused with the rapture and joy that are bom of aloof- 
ness. 

And again, Udayin, a monk, by allaying initial and discursive 
thought . . . enters and abides in the second meditation which is . . . 
bom of concentration and is rapturous and joyful. He drenches, 
saturates, permeates, suffuses this very body with the rapture and 
joy that are bom of concentration ; there is no part of his whole body 
that is not suffused with the rapture and joy that are bom of 
concentration. Udayin, as a pool of water with water welling up 
within it, but which has no inlet for water from the eastern . . . 
western . . . northern ... or from the southern side, [16] and even if 
the god did not send down showers upon it from time to time, yet 
a current of water having welled up in that pool would drench, 
saturate, permeate, suffuse that pool with cool water; there would 
be no part of that pool that was not suffused with cool water — even 
so, Udayin, does a monk drench, saturate . . . there is no part of his 
whole body that is not suffused with the rapture and joy that are 
bom of concentration. 

And again, Udayin, a monk, by the fading out of rapture . . . 
enters and abides in the third meditation. He drenches, saturates, 
permeates, suffuses this very body with the joy that has no rapture ; 
there is no part of his whole body that is not suffused with the joy 
that has no rapture. In a pond of white ... red ... or blue lotuses, 
some white, red or blue lotuses are bom in the water, grow up in the 
water, never rising above the surface but flourishing beneath it — as 
these from their roots to their tips are drenched, saturated, per- 
meated, suffused by cool water — even so, Udayin, does a monk 
drench, saturate . . . there is no part of his whole body that is not 
suffused with the joy that has no rapture. 

And again, Udayin, a monk by getting rid of joy and by getting 
rid of anguish, by the going down of his former pleasures and sorrows, 
enters and abides in the fourth meditation which has neither anguish 
nor joy, and which is entirely purified by equanimity and mindful- 
ness. He, having suffused this very body with a mind that is 



II. 16-17 


217 


To Sakuluddyin (Greater) 

utterly pure, utterly clean, comes to be sitting down; there is no part 
of his whole body that is not suffused with a mind that is utterly 
pure, utterly clean. Udayin, a man might be sitting down who has 
clothed himself including his head with a white cloth. Even as 
there would be no part of his whole body not suffused with the white 
cloth, so, Udayin, when a monk is sitting down having suffused this 
very body with a mind that is utterly pure, utterly clean, there is no 
part of his whole body [17] that is not suffused by a mind that is 
utterly pure, utterly clean. As to this, many of my disciples abide 
attained to accomplishment and to going beyond through super- 
knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine comprehend thus: 
‘ This body of mine, having material shape, made of the four great 
elements, originated from mother and father, nourished on gruel and 
sour milk, is of a nature to be constantly rubbed away, pounded 
away, broken up and scattered, 1 * but this consciousness of mine is 
fastened there, bound there. 8 Udayin, as an emerald jewel, 3 of 
lovely water, well cut into eight facets, translucent, flawless, having 
all good qualities, might be strung on a thread, blue-green or yellow 
or red or white or orange-coloured ; and a man with vision, having 
put it in his hand, might reflect: ‘ This emerald jewel ... is strung on 
a thread, blue-green ... or orange-coloured ’ — even so, Udayin, a 
course has been pointed out by me for disciples, practising which 
disciples of mine know 4 thus: ‘ This body of mine ... is of a nature 
to be constantly rubbed away . . . and scattered, but this conscious- 
ness 5 * is fastened there, bound there/ As to this, many of my 
disciples abide attained . . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine from this body (mentally) 
produce (another) body, having material shape, mind-made, 4 having 
all its major and minor parts, not deficient in any sense-organ. 7 As, 
Udayin, a man might draw an arrow from a reed 8 and might think 

i Cf. M. i. 144. * As at D. i. 76. 

* Cf. M. ii. 33, ill. 121; D. i. 76, ii. 13, etc. See PTC., s.v. althamsa. 

4 Above, pajdnanti, “ comprehend here jananti, 44 know.” 

1 me, ** of mine,” not in the text here although it is above. 

4 manomaya as at Dhp. 1, 2. MA. iii. 263 explains: manena nibbattiiarh. 

1 As at D. i. 77; cf. also D. i. 34, 186, 195. 

4 Dial . i. 88, n. 2 notes that “ this old simile has occurred already in the 

Satapatha-Brfi hmana IV, 3, 3, 16.” The other notes at Dial. i. 88 should 

also be consulted. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Some Pali Words , p. 166, says that 



218 


II. 17-19 


77. Mate-Sakuludayisutia 

thus: ‘ This is the reed, this the arrow, the reed is one thing, the 
arrow another ; it is from the reed that the arrow has been drawn ' ; or 
again, Udayin, as a man might draw a sword from the scabbard and 
might think thus: * This is the sword, this the scabbard, the sword is 
one thing, the scabbard another; it is from the scabbard that the 
sword has been drawn ' ; or again, [18] Udayin, as a man might take 
a snake out of the slough and might think thus: * This is the snake, 
this the slough, the snake is one thing, the slough another; it is from 
the slough that the snake has been taken out * — even so, Udayin, 
a course has been pointed out by me for disciples, practising which 
my disciples from this body (mentally) produce (another) body 
. . . not deficient in any sense-organ. As to this many of my disciples 
abide attained to accomplishment and to going benond through 
super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine experience the various 
forms of psychic power; 1 having been one they become manifold; 
having been manifold they become one; manifest or invisible they 
go unhindered through a wall, through a rampart, through a moun- 
tain as if through air; they plunge into the ground and up again as if 
in water; they walk upon the water without parting it as if on the 
ground; sitting cross-legged they travel through the air like a bird 
on the wing ; and with their hands they rub and stroke this moon and 
sun which are of such power and majesty, and even as far as the 
Brahma-world they have power with the person. As, Udayin, a 
skilled potter or potter's apprentice from properly prepared clay 
could make whatever shaped clay vessel he wished ; or as a skilled 
ivory-worker or ivory-worker's apprentice from properly prepared 
ivory could make whatever shaped ivory vessel he wished;. or as a 
skilled goldsmith or goldsmith's apprentice from properly prepared 
gold could make whatever shaped gold vessel he wished — even 
so, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for disciples, 
practising which disciples of mine experience the various forms of 
psychic power . . . [10] . . . and even as far as the Brahma-world 


1 As at M. i. 34, etc. All these are psychic powers of the spirit. The 
Brahma-world is no doubt the highest world of mentality and mental activity, 
and where the meditator is unhindered by reaction to sense-impressions. 


when the fletcher goes to the munja marshes, what he pulls out is for him 
the arrow and what he leaves behind is the plant. The point of all these 
similes is that what is pulled out resembles what it is pulled out from. 



IT. 19-20 To Sakuluddyin ( Greater ) 219 

they have power with the person. As to this, many of my disciples 
abide attained to accomplishment and to going beyond through 
super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine through the purified 
deva-element of hearing surpassing that of men, hear both sounds; 
the dem-like and the human, those that are distant and those that 
are near. As, Udayin, a powerful conch-blower could, without 
trouble, inform the four quarters, even so, Udayin, a course has been 
pointed out by me for disciples, practising which disciples of mine 
through the purified deva-e lenient of hearing . . . hear both sounds 
. . . and those that are near. As to this, many of my disciples abide 
. . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine comprehend with the 
mind the minds of other beings, of other individuals 1 ; they com- 
prehend the mind with attachment as a mind with attachment; 
they comprehend the mind without attachment as a mind with- 
out attachment; they comprehend the mind with aversion as a 
mind with aversion; they comprehend the mind without aversion 
as a mind without aversion . . . the mind with confusion as a mind 
with confusion . . . the mind without confusion as a mind without 
confusion . . . the mind that is contracted as a mind that is contracted 
. . . the mind that is distracted as a mind that is distracted . . . the 
mind that has become great as a mind that has become great . . . the 
mind that has not become great as a mind that has not become great 
. . . the mind with (some other mental state) superior to it as a mind 
with (some other mental state) superior to it . . . the mind with no 
(other mental state) superior to it as a mind with no (other mental 
state) superior to it . . . the mind that is composed as a mind that is 
composed . . . the mind that is not composed as a mind that is not 
composed . . . the mind that is freed as a mind that is freed . . . the 
mind that is not freed as a mind that is not freed. Udayin, it is like 
a woman or a man, young and of tender years, fond of adornment, 
who, regarding the reflection of (her or his) own face in a perfectly 
pure and perfectly clean mirror or in a bowl of clear water would, if 
it had a mole on it, know that it had, [20] and if not, would know that 
it had not. 8 Even so, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me 
for disciples, practising which disciples of mine comprehend with the 


1 As at M, i. 34, 39, etc. 


a As at D. i. 80. 



220 


II. 20-21 


77. Maha-Sakuludayi8utta 

mind the mind of other beings, of other individuals ; they comprehend 
the mind with attachment as a mind with attachment . . . the mind 
that is not freed as a mind that is not freed. As to this, many of my 
disciples abide . . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine recollect a variety of 
former habitations, 1 that is to say: one birth, two births . . . 
three ...four... five... ten... twenty... thirty. .. forty ... fifty 
... a hundred ... a thousand ... a hundred thousand births, and 
many an eon of integration and many an eon of disintegration and 
many an eon of integration-disintegration. * Such a one was I by 
name, having such and such a clan, such and such a colour, so was I 
nourished, such and such pleasant and painful experiences were 
mine, so did the span of life end. Passing from this, I came to be in 
another state where such a one was I by name, having such and such 
a clan, such and such a colour, so was I nourished, such and such 
pleasant and painful experiences were mine, so did the span of life 
end. Passing from this, I arose here.* Thus they recollect divers 
former habitations in all their mode and detail. Udayin, it is like* 
a man who might go from his own village to another village, and who 
from that village might go to another village and from that village 
might return to his own village. This might occur to him: * I went 
from my own village to a certain other village where I stood thus, 
sat down thus, spoke thus, was silent thus; and from that village I 
went to another village where too [21] I stood thus . . . was silent 
thus; then from that village I returned to my own village.* Even 
so, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for disciples, 
practising which disciples of mine recollect a variety of former 
habitations, that is to say: one birth, two births . . . thus they 
recollect divers former habitations in all their mode and detail. As 
to this, many of my disciples abide . . . through super-knowledge. 

And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine with the purified deva - 
vision surpassing that of men, see beings as they are passing hence 
and coming to be,* and they comprehend that beings are mean, 
excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going, according to the con- 
sequences of deeds and they think: * Indeed these worthy beings who 
were possessed of wrong conduct in body . . . speech ... thought, 
scoffers at the ariyans, holding a wrong view, incurring deeds 


1 As at M . i. 22, etc. 


* As at M . i. 278. 


3 As at M . i. 22, etc. 




II. 21-22 To Sahuludayin ( Greater ) 221 

consequent on a wrong view — these at the breaking up of the body 
after dying, have arisen in a sorrowful state, a bad bourn, the abyss, 
Niraya Hell. But these worthy beings who were possessed of good 
conduct in body . . . speech . . . thought, who did not scoff at the 
ariyans, holding a right view, incurring deeds consequent on a right 
view — these at the breaking up of the body after dying, have arisen 
in a good bourn, a heaven world.* Thus with the purified dew- 
vision surpassing that of men do they see beings as they are passing 
hence and coming to be, and they comprehend that beings are mean, 
excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going according to the con- 
sequences of deeds. It is as if, 1 Udayin, there might be two houses 
with doors, and if a man with vision were standing there between 
them he might see people entering and leaving the houses, visiting 
and strolling about. Even so, Udayin, a course has been pointed 
out by me for disciples, practising which disciples of mine with the 
purified deva - vision surpassing that of men see beings as they are 
passing hence and coming to be and they comprehend that beings 
are mean, excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going according to 
the consequences of deeds. As to this, many of my disciples abide 
. . . through super-knowledge. 

[22] And again, Udayin, a course has been pointed out by me for 
disciples, practising which disciples of mine by the destruction of the 
cankers, having realised here-now through their own super-knowledge 
the freedom of mind and the freedom through intuitive wisdom that 
are cankerless, enter and abide therein. Udayin, it is like 1 a 
pure, limpid, serene pool of water where, if a man with vision were 
standing on the bank, he might see oysters and shells, and gravel and 
pebbles, and shoals of fish moving about and keeping still. It might 
occur to him: ‘ This pool of water is pure, limpid, serene, here these 
oysters and shells, and the gravel and pebbles, and shoals of fish are 
moving about and keeping still.* Even so, Udayin, a course has 
been pointed out by me for disciples, practising which disciples of 
mine by the destruction of the cankers, having realised here-now 

through their own super-knowledge the freedom of mind and the 
freedom through wisdom that are cankerless, enter and abide therein. 
As to this, many of my disciples abide attained to accomplishment 
and to going beyond through super-knowledge. 

This, Udayin, is the fifth thing for which disciples of mine revere, 
respect, esteem and honour me and, revering and respecting, live in 
dependence. 


1 As at M. i. 279. 



222 77. MaM-Sakuluddyi&utta II. 22-23 

These, Udayin, are the five things for which disciples of mine 
revere, respect, esteem and honour me and, revering and respecting, 
live in dependence. ,, 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the wanderer Sakuludayin 
rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin: 

The Seventh 


78. DISCOURSE TO SAMANAMANDIKA (’S SON) 

(Sama$aman<Jikasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Savatth! 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapi^dika’s monastery. Now at that time 
the wanderer Uggahamana, Samanamandika’s son, was staying in 
the One Hall, set round with a row of tinduka trees, 1 in Mallika’s 
park which was intended for discussion, 2 [23] together with a company 
of wanderers numbering at least three hundred. 3 Then early one 
morning the carpenter Pancakanga left SavatthI so as to see the 
Lord. Then it occurred to Pancakanga the carpenter: “ It is not 
yet the right time to see the Lord. The Lord has withdrawn. Nor 
is it the season to see the monks who are developing their minds. 4 
The monks who are developing their minds have withdrawn. 
Suppose that I were to approach Mallika’s park, which is intended 
for discussion, the One Hall, set round with a row of tinduka trees, 
and Uggahamana the wanderer, Samanamandika’s son ?” 5 Then 

1 MA. iii. 266 says that the One Hall, ekasdld , was surrounded' by rows of 
tinduka and timbaru trees. At first there was only the one hall, and although 
later many more were built for the wanderers, such as Pofcthapada and others, 
the name of One Hall was retained. 

1 samayappavadake. MA . iii. 266 says this is an drama , a park, where 
brahmans, Jains, unclothed wanderers and so on meet together to discuss 
and to state their opinions. Samayappavadaka is therefore a descriptive 
epithet of the park that Mallika had made for the wanderers, and not “ the 
debating hall ” as such. 

* This sentence is also at D. i. 178. 

4 manobhdvaniyd bhikkhu , as at M. iii. 261 ; S. iii. 1 ; Miln . 129. 

4 Although Uggahamana always receives this full title in this Discourse, 
for the sake of brevity 1 shall refer to him as Uggahamana only. 



II. 23-24 


223 


To Samaqama'wfika (*$ Son) 

Pancakanga the carpenter approached. Mallika’s park , . . and 
Uggahamana. At that time Uggahamana was sitting down with a 
great company of wanderers shouting out with a loud noise, a great 
noise 1 . . . talk about becoming or not becoming thus or thus. 
Uggahamana saw the carpenter Pancakanga coming in the distance ; 
seeing him, he called his own company to order, saying: 

“ Good sirs, let there be little noise ; do not, good sirs, make a noise ; 
this is a disciple of the recluse Gotama who is coming — the carpenter 
Pancakanga. For as long as white-frocked householders, disciples of 
the recluse Gotama, have been staying at Savatthi, the carpenter 
Pancakanga has been among them. These venerable ones wish for 
little noise, they are trained to little noise, they are praisers of little 
noise. So, if he knows that this is a company of little noise, he may 
consider approaching.” Then these wanderers fell silent. 

Then Paiicakariga the carpenter approached Uggahamana; having 
approached he exchanged greetings with Uggahamana; [24] having 
conversed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. Uggahamana spoke thus to Pancakanga the carpenter as 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance: 

“ I, carpenter, lay down that an individual who is endowed with 
four qualities is abounding in skill, of the highest skill, an uncon- 
querable recluse attained to the utmost attainments. With what 
four ? As to this, carpenter, he does no evil deed with his body, he 
speaks no evil speech, he intends no evil intention, he leads no evil 
mode of livelihood. I lay down, carpenter, that if an individual is 
endowed with these four qualities he is abounding in skill, of the 
highest skill, an unconquerable recluse attained to the utmost 
attainments.” 

But the carpenter Pancakanga neither rejoiced in what Ugga- 
hamana had said nor scoffed. Neither rejoicing nor scoffing, rising 
from his seat, he departed, thinking: “ I will discover the meaning of 
what was said in the Lord’s presence.” Then Pancakanga the 
carpenter approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted 

the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he ivas sitting 
down at a respectful distance Pancakanga the carpenter told the 
Lord the whole of the conversation he had had wdth Uggahamana. 
This said, the Lord spoke thus to Pancakanga the carpenter: 

“ This being so, carpenter, then according to the speech of 
Uggahamana a young baby boy lying on its back 2 would be of 


1 As in Suttas 76, 77, see above, pp. 192, 203. 


*0/. M. i. 394. 



224 78. SamaiMmaydiiasiUta II. 24-25 

abounding skill, of the highest skill, an unconquerable recluse 
attained to the utmost attainments. For, carpenter, a young baby 
boy lying on its back does not think of its own body. 1 * How then 
could it do an evil deed with its body, except for a little kicking 
about ? A young baby boy . . . does not think of its own voice. 
How then could it utter an evil speech, except for a little crying ? 
A young baby boy . . . does not think about its own intention. How 
then could it intend an evil intention, except for a little excitement ? a 
A young baby boy, carpenter, lying on its back does not think of its 
own mode of livelihood. How then [25] could it lead an evil mode of 
livelihood, except for taking its mother’s milk ? This being so, 
carpenter, then according to the speech of Uggahamana a young baby 
boy lying on its back would be of abounding skill . . . attained to the 
utmost attainments. 

Now I, carpenter, lay down that an individual, endowed with four 
qualities, is neither of abounding skill nor of the highest skill nor is 
he an unconquerable recluse attained to the utmost attainments; 
and that these moreover merely distinguish 3 a young baby boy lying 
on its back. With what four ? As to this, carpenter, he does no 
evil deed with his body, he utters no evil speech, he intends no evil 
intention, he leads no evil mode of livelihood. I, carpenter, lay 
down that if an individual is endowed with these four qualities he is 
neither abounding in skill, nor of the highest skill, nor an un- 
conquerable recluse attained to the utmost attainments; and that 
these moreover merely distinguish a young baby boy lying on its 
back. 

I, carpenter, lay down that an individual, endowed with ten 
qualities, is abounding in skill, of the highest skill, an unconquerable 
recluse attained to the utmost attainments. I say it is to be under- 
stood for him, 4 * carpenter, that these 6 are unskilled moral habits. 

I say it is to be understood for him, carpenter, that hence-originating 
are unskilled moral habits. I say it is to be understood for him, 
carpenter, that here unskilled moral habits are stopped without 
remainder. I say it is to be understood for him, carpenter, that 


1 kayo ti pi na hoti . MA. iii. 267 says it does not know the difference 
between its own body and those of others. 

* It cries or laughs according to whether it has come from Niraya Hell or 
a deva- world, M A. iii. 268. 

* samadhiggayha tifthati , see above, p. 184, n. 2. 

4 taharh , a locative of to. 

6 This and the next two sentences begin respectively with tme, ito , idha. 



II. 26-26 


226 


To Samanamandika (s Son ) 

faring along thus, he is faring along for the stopping of unskilled 
moral habits. I say it is to be understood for him, carpenter, that 
these are skilled moral habits ... I say it is to be understood for him, 
carpenter, that here skilled moral habits are stopped without 
remainder. I say it is to be understood for him, carpenter, that 
faring along thus, he is faring along for the stopping of skilled moral 
habits. I say it is to be understood for him, carpenter, that these 
are unskilled intentions . . . [26] I say it is to be understood for 
him, carpenter, that faring along thus, he is faring along for the stop- 
ping of skilled intentions. 

And which, carpenter, are the unskilled moral habits ? Unskilled 
deed of body, unskilled deed of speech, evil mode of livelihood — 
these, carpenter, are called unskilled moral habits. And how, 
carpenter, do these unskilled moral habits originate ? Their origin- 
ation is spoken of too. It should be answered that the origination 
is in the mind. 1 * Which mind ? For the mind is manifold, various, 
diverse. That mind 8 which has attachment, aversion, confusion — 
originating from this are unskilled moral habits. But where, 3 
carpenter, are these unskilled moral habits stopped without 
remainder ? Their stopping is spoken of too. As to this, carpenter, 
a monk, getting rid of wrong conduct in body, develops right conduct 
in body; getting rid of wrong conduct in speech, he develops right 
conduct in speech; getting rid of wrong conduct in thought, he 
develops right conduct in thought; getting rid of a wrong mode of 
livelihood, he leads his life with a right mode of livelihood. It is 
thus that these unskilled moral habits are stopped without remainder. 
And faring along in what way, carpenter, is he faring along for the 
stopping of unskilled moral habits ? As to this, carpenter, a monk 
generates desire, 4 * * * he endeavours, stirs up energy, exerts his mind and 
strives for the non-arising of evil unskilled states of mind that have 
not arisen ... for the getting rid of evil unskilled states of mind that 
have arisen ... for the arising of skilled states of mind that have not 
arisen ... for the maintenance, preservation, increase, maturity, 
development and completion of skilled states of mind that have 


1 ciUa. 

* I think the reading here should be yam citiarh (instead of sacittam) as in 

the paragraph below on the skilled moral habits. 

* kxihim. MA. iii. 269 says katamam thanarh papunitva, having achieved 

which stage T — the stage of stream -attainment, or which ? The answer is 

immediately given, and its conclusion: * It is here ... * means, according 

to MA. iii. 269, in the fruit of stream-attainment. 

* As at if. ii. 11. 



226 78. SaiMWtmrdikfoutta II. 26-27 

arisen. Faring along thus, [27] carpenter, he is faring along for the 
stopping of unskilled moral habits. 

And which, carpenter, are the skilled moral habits ? Skilled deed 
of body, skilled deed of speech ; and I, carpenter, say that included in 
moral habit is entire purity of mode of livelihood. These, carpenter, 
are called skilled moral habits. And how, carpenter, do these 
skilled moral habits originate ? Their origination is spoken of too. 
It should be answered that the origination is in the mind. Which 
mind ? For the mind is manifold, various, diverse. That mind 
which is devoid of attachment, devoid of aversion, devoid of confusion 
— originating from this are the skilled moral habits. And where, 
carpenter, are these skilled moral habits stopped without remainder ? 
Their stopping is spoken of too. As to this, carpenter, a monk is of 
moral habit and has no addition to make to moral habit, 1 and he 
comprehends that freedom of mind, that freedom through intuitive 
wisdom as they really are. Herein 2 are these skilled moral habits of 
his stopped without remainder. And faring along in what way, 
carpenter, is he faring along for the stopping of skilled moral habits ? 
As to this, carpenter, a monk generates desire, he endeavours, stirs 
up energy, exerts his mind and strives for the non-arising of evil 
unskilled states of mind that have not arisen ... for the main- 
tenance, preservation, increase, maturity, development and com- 
pletion of skilled states of mind that have arisen. Faring along thus, 
carpenter, he is faring along for the stopping of skilled moral habits. 

And which, carpenter, are unskilled intentions ? Intention for 
sense-pleasures, intention for malevolence, intention for harming. 
These, carpenter, are called unskilled intentions. And how, 
carpenter, do these unskilled intentions originate ? Their origin- 
ation is spoken of too. It should be answered that their origination 
is in perception. Which perception ? For perception is many, 
various, diverse: perception of sense-pleasures, perception of 
malevolence, perception of harming — originating from these are 
unskilled intentions. But where, carpenter, are these unskilled 
intentions stopped without remainder % Their stopping is spoken of 
too. As to this, carpenter, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the 

1 sllavd hoti no ca silamayo . VvA. 10 adduces six meanings of the word 
tnaya , and as an example of the sixth gives ddnamaya , a&lamaya , in the sense 
of adding a syllable for the sake of completeness. But MA. iii, 270 says 
no ca silamayo means that, being possessed of moral habit, there is nothing 
further than this to bo done. 

* yattha: in the fruit gf arahantship, MA, iii. 270. 



II. 28-29 To Samanamandika ( 9 s Son) 227 

senses, [28] . . . enters and abides in the first meditation. Herein 
are these unskilled intentions stopped without remainder. And 
faring along in what way, carpenter, is he faring along for the stopping 
of unskilled intentions ? As to this, carpenter, a monk generates 
desire, he endeavours, stirs up energy, exerts his mind and strives 
for the non-arising of evil unskilled states of mind that have not 
arisen ... for the maintenance, preservation, increase, maturity, 
development and completion of skilled states of mind that have 
arisen. Faring along thus, carpenter, he is faring along for the 
stopping of unskilled intentions. 

And which, carpenter, are skilled intentions ? Intention for 
renunciation, intention for non-malevolence, intention for non- 
harming. These, carpenter, are called skilled intentions. And 
how, carpenter, do these skilled intentions originate ? Their 
origination is spoken of too. It should be answered that their 
origination is in perception. Which perception ? For perception 
is many, various, diverse : perception of renunciation, perception of 
non-malevolence, perception of non-harming — originating from 
these are skilled intentions. But where, carpenter, are these skilled 
perceptions stopped without remainder ? Their stopping is spoken 
of too. As to this, carpenter, a monk, allaying initial and discursive 
thought . . . enters and abides in the second meditation. Herein 
are these skilled intentions stopped without remainder. And faring 
along in what way, carpenter, is he faring along for the stopping of 
skilled intentions ? As to this, carpenter, a monk generates desire, he 
endeavours, stirs up energy, exerts his mind and strives for the non- 
arising of evil unskilled states of mind that have not arisen . . . for 
the maintenance, preservation, increase, maturity, development and 
completion of skilled states of mind that have arisen. Faring along 
thus, carpenter, he is faring along for the stopping of skilled inten- 
tions. 

And endowed with what ten qualities do I, carpenter, lay down 
that an individual [29] is abounding in skill, of the highest skill, an 
unconquerable recluse attained to the utmost attainments ? As to 
this, carpenter, a monk is endowed with the perfect view of an adept, 
he is endowed with the perfect intention of an adept . . . the perfect 
speech . *. . the perfect action . . . the perfect mode of livelihood . . . 
the perfect endeavour . . . the perfect mindfulness . . . the perfect 
concentration . . . the perfect knowledge of an adept, he is endowed 
with the perfect freedom of an adept. I, carpenter, lay down that an 
individual, endowed with these ten qualities, is abounding in skill, 



228 78. SamariamandikaAiUta II. 29-31 

of the highest skill, an unconquerable recluse attained to the highest 
attainments.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, Pancakanga the carpenter 
rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse to Samanamandika (’s son) : 

The Eighth 


79. LESSER DISCOURSE TO SAKULUDAYIN 

(Cula-Sakuludayisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding place. Now at that 
time the wanderer Sakuludayin was living in the wanderers’ park at 
the peacocks’ feeding place together with a large company of wan- 
derers. Then the Lord, having dressed in the morning, taking his 
bowl and robe, entered Rajagaha for almsfood 1 . . . [30] “. . . And 
what was your talk that was interrupted ?” 

“ Let be that talk, revered sir, for which we are now gathered 
together here. It will not be difficult for the Lord to hear this talk 
later. When I, Lord, am not near this company, then this company 
is sitting down talking a variety of inferior talk. But when I, Lord, 
am near this company, then this company is sitting down gazing 
at my face, saying: ‘ We will listen to whatever dlxamma the recluse 
Udayin speaks to us.’ But when, Lord, [31] the Lord is near this 
company, then I and this company are alike sitting down gazing at 
the Lord’s face, and saying: ‘ We will listen to whatever dhamma the 
Lord speaks to us.’ ” 

“ Well then, Udayin, let something occur to you here so that you 
can speak it to me.” 

“ Some time ago, revered sir, one who was all-knowing, all-seeing, 
claiming all-embracing knowledge-and- vision, said: ‘ Whether I am 
walking or standing still or asleep or awake, knowledge-and- vision is 
constantly and perpetually before me.’ 2 He, on being asked a 


1 As in Sta. 77 ; and c/. Stas. 76, 78. 


As at M . i. 519. 



II. 31-32 To Sakuluddyin (Lesser) 229 

question by me concerning the past, shelved the question by (asking) 
another, answered off the point and evinced temper and ill-will and 
sulkiness. 1 It was because of this, revered sir, that rapture arose in 
me respecting the Lord, and I thought: * Ah, indeed it is the Lord, 
ah, indeed it is the Well-farer that is skilled in these matters/ ” 

“ But who was this, Udayin, that all-knowing, all-seeing, claiming 
all-embracing knowledge-and-vision, said : 1 Whether I am walking 
or standing still or asleep or awake, knowledge-and-vision is con- 
stantly and perpetually before me,* and who, on being asked a 
question by you . . . evinced temper and ill-will and sulkiness V 9 

“ Revered sir, it was Nataputta the Jain.” 

“ Udayin, whoever could recollect a variety of former habitations, 
that is to say: one birth, and two births . . . and could recollect thus 
in all their mode and detail a variety of former habitations, either he 
could ask me a question concerning the past or I could ask him a 
question concerning the past; either he could turn his mind to 
answering my question concerning the past or I could turn my mind 
to answering his question concerning the past. Udayin, whoever 
could with the purified deva-v ision surpassing that of men behold 
beings as they are passing hence and coming to be, mean, excellent, 
comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going . . . could comprehend creatures 
according to the consequences of deeds, either he could ask me a 
question concerning the future [32] or I could ask him a question 
concerning the future ; either he could turn his mind to answering 
my question concerning the future or I could turn my mind to 
answering his question concerning the future. 

Wherefore, Udayin, let be the past, let be the future. I will teach 
you dliamma : If this is, that comes to be; from the arising of this, 
that arises ; if this is not, that does not come to be ; from the stopping 
of this, that is stopped/ 1 

“ But I, revered sir, even to the extent that I have realised this 
individuality of mine, am not able to recollect it with its mode and 
detail. How then should I recollect a variety of former habitations, 
that is to say one birth, and two births . . . and say that I recollect ft 
variety of former habitations in all their mode and detail, like the 
Lord ? Then I, revered sir, do not even see a mud-sprite* at present. 
How then should I with the purified deva-vision surpassing that of 
men behold beings as they are passing hence and coming to be . . . 
comprehend beings according to the consequences of deeds, like the 


* <7/. M. i. 260. 


parhsupisdcaha. 



230 79. Cifa-Saktdiuldyisittta II. 32-33 

Lord ? So that when, revered sir, the Lord spoke thus to me: * Let 
be the past, let be the future. I will teach you dhamma : If this is, 
that comes to be; from the arising of this, that arises; if this is not, 
that does not come to be ; from the stopping of this, that is stopped ’ 
— then that is not abundantly clear to me. Nevertheless I, revered 
sir, could satisfy the Lord’s mind with an explanation of the question 
that belongs to our own teachers.” 

“ What do jour own teachers say, Udayin ?” 

“ Revered sir, our own teachers speak thus : ‘ This is the highest 
lustre, 1 * this is the highest lustre.’ ” 

“ But when your own teachers speak thus to you, Udayin: ‘ This 
is the highest lustre, this is the highest lustre/ which is this highest 
lustre ?” 

“ Revered sir, there is no other lustre superior to or more 
excellent than this lustre, it is the highest lustre.” 

“ But which is this lustre, Udayin, than which there is no other 
lustre superior or more excellent ?” 

[33] " Revered sir, there is no other lustre superior to or more 
excellent than that lustre, it is the highest lustre.” 

“ You would be long in expanding this, Udayin. You say: 

‘ Revered sir, there is no other lustre superior to or more excellent 
than this lustre, it is the highest lustre,’ but you do not point to this 
lustre. Udayin, it is as though a man should say: 2 4 Whoever is the 
belle of this countryside, I want her, I desire her.’ Another man 
might say to him ‘ My good man, do you know whether this belle of 
the countryside whom you want and desire is a noble maiden or a 
brahmin or a merchant or a worker V Asked this, he would say: 
‘ No.’ The other might say to him : ‘ My good man, do you know the 
name or the clan of this belle of the countryside whom you want and 
desire . . . whether she is tall or short or of medium height, or dark 
or brown or sallow; or what village or market town or what town she 
belongs to V Asked this, he might say: 4 No.’ The other might 
speak to him thus : 4 My good man, do you want and desire her whom 
you know not, see not V Asked this, he might say: ‘ Yes/ What 
do you think about this, Udayin ? This being so, surely that man’s 
irresponsible talk 3 does not prosper him ?” 


1 Cf. the following with M. ii. 40. Vanna is a word of several meanings, 

such as colour, caste, beauty, appearance, praise. a As at D, i. 241. 

3 appatihlrakata bhasita , as at M. ii. 41, D. i. 193, 239, 242, 244. MA . iii. 

273 explains as anniyanika amulaka niratthaka , what does not lead onwards, 
is groundless and without a goal. Cf. appafihdriya at M. ii. 9, 



II. 33-34 To Sakuluddyin (Lesser) 231 

" Certainly, revered sir, this being so, that man’s irresponsible talk 
does not prosper him.” 

" But even so do you, Udayin, say: * Revered sir, there is no other 
lustre superior to or more excellent than this lustre, it is the highest 
lustre.’ But you do not point to this lustre.” 

“ Revered sir, as an emerald jewel, 1 of lovely water, well cut into 
eight facets, if placed on a pale piece of cloth shines and gleams and 
glows — of such a lustre is the hale self 2 * * after dying.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two lustres, 
which is the surpassing and more excellent: that emerald jewel, of 
lovely water, cut into eight facets that, if placed on a pale piece 
of cloth [34] shines and gleams and glows; or some glow-worm or 
fire-fly in the dense darkness of the night ?” 

“ Why, revered sir, of these two lustres, the surpassing and more 
excellent is the glow-worm or fire-fly in the dense darkness of the 
night.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two lustres, 
which is the surpassing and more excellent: the glow-worm or fire-fly 
in the dense darkness of the night or an oil-lamp in the dense darkness 
of the night 1” 

“ Why, revered sir, the oil-lamp.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two lustres, 
which is the surpassing and more excellent: the oil-lamp in the dense 
darkness of the night or a great blaze of fire in the dense darkness of 
the night ?” 

“ Why, revered sir, the great blaze of fire in the dense darkness of 
the night.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two lustres, 
which is the surpassing and more excellent: the great blaze of fire 
in the dense darkness of the night or the morning star in a clear 
cloudless sky towards dawn ?” 

“ Why, revered sir, the morning star in a clear cloudless sky 
towards dawn is the surpassing and more excellent of these two 

lustres.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two lustres, 
which is the surpassing and more excellent: the morning star in a 
clear cloudless sky towards dawn or the moon at its zenith 8 in 

1 Cf. M. ii. 17. 

* Cf. M. ii. 228. MA. iii. 273 says it is said that at the time of dying the 

self shines as though in the world of the Subh&kinha devas. 

* abhido . MA. iii. 274 says: gag anamajjhe . . . majjhantiJce. 


232 79. Cufa-Sahrtuddyisutta II. 34-36 

a clear cloudless sky at midnight on an Observance day, a 
fifteenth ?” 

“ Why, revered sir, on an Observance day, a fifteenth, the moon 
at its zenith in a clear cloudless sky at midnight.” 

[36] “ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Of these two 
lustres, which is the surpassing and more excellent: the moon at its 
zenith in a clear cloudless sky at midnight on an Observance day, 
a fifteenth, or the sun at its zenith in a clear cloudless sky at noonday 
in the last month of the rains in the autumn V* 

“ Why, revered sir, the sun at its zenith in a clear cloudless sky 
at noonday in the last month of the rains in the autumn is of these 
two lustres the surpassing and more excellent.” 

“ Greater than these are those many devas, Udayin, who do not 
share in 1 the brilliance of these moons and suns — that I comprehend. 
But then I do not say: ‘ There is no other lustre superior to or more 
excellent than this lustre.* But you, Udayin, although the lustre 
of a glow-worm or a fire-fly is feebler and poorer, say it is the highest 
lustre. And you do not point to that lustre.** 

“ The Lord has settled the talk, the Well-farer has settled the talk.** 
“ But why do you, Udayin, speak thus : ‘ The Lord has settled the 
talk, the Well-farer has settled the talk * ?’* 

“ Revered sir, our own teachers speak thus: ‘ This is the highest 
lustre, this is the highest lustre.* But these teachers of ours, 
revered sir, on being questioned, cross-questioned and pressed for 
reasons by the Lord, are empty, void and have fallen short.** 2 
“ But, Udayin, is there a world that is exclusively happy ? Is 
there a reasoned course 3 for realising a world that is exclusively 
happy ?** 

“ Revered sir, our own teachers speak thus: ‘ There is a world 
that is exclusively happy; there is a reasoned course for realising a 
world that ia exclusively happy.* ** 

“ And which, Udayin, is this reasoned course for realising a world 
that is exclusively happy ?*’ 

“ As to this, revered sir, someone, giving up onslaught on creatures, 
abstains from onslaught on creatures; giving up taking what has not 
been given, he abstains from taking what has not been given; giving 
up wrong conduct in regard to sense-pleasures, he abstains from 
wrong conduct in regard to sense-pleasures; [36] giving up lying 


1 ndnubhonti , not to share in, draw on or derive from. * As at M. i. 233. 

* akaravatx paiipada . Cf. dkaravati saddha , a reasoned faith, at M . i. 320. 



II. 36-37 To Sakuludayin ( Lesser ) 233 

speech, he abstains from lying speech; or he lives undertaking a 
certain asceticism. 1 This, revered sir, is a reasoned course for 
realising a world that is exclusively happy.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? At the time when, 
giving up onslaught on creatures, he abstains from onslaught on 
creatures, is the self at that time exclusively happy or is it happy and 
sorrowful V 9 

" It is happy and sorrowful, revered sir.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? At the time when 
givingup takingwhat has not been given . . . giving up wrong conduct 
in regard to sense-pleasures ... at the time when, giving up lying 
speech, he abstains from lying speech, is the self at that time 
exclusively happy or is it happy and sorrowful V* 

“ It is happy and sorrowful, revered sir.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? At the time when he 
lives undertaking some asceticism, is the self at that time exclusively 
happy or is it happy and sorrowful V 9 

“ It is happy and sorrowful, revered sir.” 

“ What do you think about this, Udayin ? Is not then the course 
for realising a world that is exclusively happy one that is both happy 
and sorrowful V 9 

“ The Lord has settled this talk, the Well-farer has settled this 
talk.” 

“ But why do you, Udayin, speak thus : * The Lord has settled this 
talk, the Well-farer has settled this talk* ? ” 

“ Revered sir, our own teachers speak thus; 1 There is a world that 
is exclusively happy, there is a reasoned course for realising a world 
that is exclusively happy/ But these teachers of ours, revered sir, 
on being questioned, cross-questioned and pressed for reasons by the 
Lord, are empty, void, and have fallen short. But, revered sir, is 
there a world that is exclusively happy ? Is there a reasoned course 
for realising a world that is exclusively happy ?” 

[37] “ There is indeed, Udayin, a world that is exclusively happy. 
There is a reasoned course for realising a world that is exclusively 
happy.” 

“ And which, revered sir, is this reasoned course for realising a 
world that is exclusively happy ?” 

“ As to this, Udayin, a monk, aloof from pleasures of the senses 
. . . enters and abides in the first meditation; by the allaying of initial 
and discursive thought ... he enters and abides in the second 


1 tapoguna. 




234 


II. 37-38 


79, Cula-Sakuludayisutta 

meditation ... he enters and abides in the third meditation. This, 
Udayin, is that reasoned course for realising a world that is exclusively 
happy.” 

“ But this, revered sir, is not a reasoned course for realising a 
world that is exclusively happy. For the world that is exclusively 
happy might have been already realised.” 

“ Indeed, Udayin, a world that is exclusively happy could not 
have been already realised. For this is itself the reasoned course for 
realising a world that is exclusively happy.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Sakuludayin’s company 
shouted out with a loud noise, a great noise: “ We have heard to 
here from our own teachers, we have heard to here from our own 
teachers. We comprehend nothing more beyond this.” Then the 
wanderer Sakuludayin, having quietened those wanderers, spoke 
thus to the Lord: 

“ But when could that world which is exclusively happy be realised, 
revered sir ?” 

“ As to this, Udayin, a monk, by getting rid of joy . . . enters and 
abides in the fourth meditation. As many as are the devatds that 
have uprisen in a world that is exclusively happy, he remains and 
talks and falls into conversation with these devatds . Indeed, 
Udayin, a world that is exclusively happy might have been already 
realised.” 

“ Now, revered sir, is it not for realising this world that is ex- 
clusively happy that monks fare the Brahma-faring under the Lord ?” 

“ No, Udayin, it is not for the sake of realising this world that is 
exclusively happy that monks fare the Brahma-faring under me. 
There simply are, Udayin, other things superior and more excellent 
for the sake of realising which monks fare the Brahma-faring under 
me, 

[ 38 ] “ But what, revered sir, are these things superior and more 
excellent, for the sake of realising which monks fare the Brahma- 
faring under the Lord ?” 

“ As to this, Udayin, a Tathagata arises in the world, perfected 
one, fully Self-Awakened One, endowed with (right) knowledge and 
conduct, Well-farer, knower of the worlds, matchless charioteer of 
men to be tamed, teacher of devas and men, the Awakened One, the 
Lord . . A . . He, by getting rid of these five hindrances — defilements 


1 As in M, Sta. 27 (see M .LJ3. i. 223 ff.) t and M . Sta. 51. M . ii. 38 does 
not repeat. 



II. 38-39 To Sakuluddyin (Lesser) 235 

of the mind and weakening to intuitive wisdom — aloof from pleasures 
of the senses . . . enters and abides in the first meditation. This is a 
thing, Udayin, superior and more excellent, for the sake of realising 
which monks fare the Brahma-faring under me. And again, Udayin, 
a monk, by allaying initial and discursive thought . . . enters and 
abides in the second meditation . . . the third meditation ... the 
fourth meditation. This too is a thing, Udayin, superior and more 
excellent, for the sake of realising which monks fare the Brahma- 
faring under me. Thus with the mind composed, quite purified, 
quite clarified, without blemish, without defilement, grown soft and 
workable, fixed, immovable, he directs his mind to the knowledge and 
recollection of former habitations . . , 1 . . . Thus he recollects divers 
former habitations in all their mode and detail. This too is a thing, 
Udayin, for the sake of realising which monks fare the Brahma-faring 
under me. With the mind composed thus, quite purified . . . im- 
movable, he directs his mind to the knowledge of the passing hence 
and coming to be of beings ... he comprehends that beings are mean, 
excellent, comely, ugly, well-going, ill-going according to the con- 
sequences of deeds. This too is a thing, superior and more excellent, 
Udayin, for the sake of realising which monks fare the Brahma-faring 
under me. With the mind composed thus, quite purified . . . im- 
movable, he directs his mind to the knowlege of the destruction of 
the cankers. He comprehends as it really is: ‘ This is anguish 
* This is the uprising of anguish ’ . . . ‘ This is the stopping of anguish 
. . . ‘ This is the course leading to the stopping of anguish.’ He 
comprehends as it really is: ‘ These are the cankers ’ . . . [39] * This 
is the arising of the cankers ’ . . . ‘ This is the stopping of the cankers ’ 

. . . ‘ This is the course leading to the stopping of the cankers.’ Of 
him who knows thus, sees thus, the mind is freed from the canker of 
sense-pleasures and the mind is freed from the canker of becoming 
and the mind is freed from the canker of ignorance. In freedom 
the knowledge comes to be that he is freed, and he comprehends: 

4 Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the Brahma-faring, done is 
what was to be done, there is no more of being such or so.’ This too 
is a thing, superior and more excellent, Udayin, for the sake of 
realising which monks fare the Brahma-faring under me. These, 
Udayin, are the things, superior and more excellent, for the sake of 
realising which monks fare the Brahma-faring under me.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Sakuludayin spoke thus to 


1 See M .L.S. i. 28. 




236 79. Cula-Sakulnddyiautta II. 39-40 

the Lord : “ It is excellent, revered sir, excellent, revered sir. It is as 
if, revered sir, one might set upright what had been upset, or might 
disclose what was covered, or point out the way to one who had gone 
astray, or might bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those 
with vision might see material shapes — even so in many a figure is 
dhamma made clear by the Lord. I, revered sir, am going to the 
Lord for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May 
I, revered sir, receive the going forth in the Lord’s presence, may I 
receive ordination V* 

When this had been said the company of the wanderer Sakulu- 
dayin spoke thus to him: 41 Do not, good Udayin, fare the Brahma- 
faring under the recluse Gotama; do not, good Udayin, having been 
a teacher, live as a pupil. As what was once a good water-pot 
might spring a leak, so would be this performance of the good Udayin. 
Do not, good Udayin, fare the Brahma-faring under the recluse 
Gotama ; do not, good Udayin, having been a teacher, live as a pupil.*’ 
It was thus that the company of the wanderer Sakuludayin made 
for the wanderer Sakuludayin a stumbling-block in (the way of) the 
Brahma-faring under the Lord. 1 

Lesser Discourse to Sakuludayin: 

The Ninth 


80 . DISCOURSE TO VEKHANASSA 

(Vekhanassasutta) 

[ 40 ] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
Savatthf in the Jeta Grove in Anathapin^ika’s monastery. Then 
the wanderer Vekhanassa 2 approached the Lord ; having approached, 

1 MA, iii. 275 says because he did not obtain the going forth they made 
this disturbance; and that later (t.e. anagate, in the future), in the time of 
Asoka, he became the thera called Asaagutta (see Miln . 6 jfjf., VbhA . 272, 
AsL 419) who was topmost of abiders in (the meditation on) friendliness, even 
extending a mind of friendliness to animals. It is because the Buddha 
knew that this would be so that be taught dhamma to Sakuludayin. 

1 M A. iii, 277 says he was the teacher of Sakuludayin (of Stas. 77 and 79). 
Wishing to find out why his pupil had been defeated by Gotama, and to defeat 
him himself on the question of the highest lustre, he went the forty*five 
yojanas from Rajagaha to Sav&tthL 



II. 40-43 


To Vekhanassa 


237 


he greeted the Lord; and having conversed in a friendly and 
courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance . As he was standing 
at a respectful distance, the wanderer Vekhanassa uttered a solemn 
utterance in the Lord's presence: “ This is the highest lustre, this is 
the highest lustre." 

“ But why do you, Kaccana, 1 speak thus: 9 This is the highest 
lustre, this is the highest lustre V Which is this highest lustre ?" 

“ Good Gotama, there is no other lustre superior to or more 
excellent than this lustre, it is the highest lustre." 

“ But which, Kaccana, is this lustre than which there is no other 
lustre superior or more excellent V 9 

“ Good Gotama, there is no other lustre superior to or more 
excellent than this lustre, it is the highest lustre." 

“You would be long in expanding this, Kaccana. You say: 

* Good Gotama, there is no other lustre superior to or more excellent 
than this lustre, it is the highest lustre.' But you do not point to 
this lustre. Kaccana, it is as though a man should say: ‘ Whoever is 
the belle of this countryside, I want her, I desire her ' . . . 2 [41] . . . 
[42] , . . Greater than these are those many devas, Kaccana, who do 
not share in the brilliance of these moons and suns — that I com- 
prehend. But then I do not say: 1 There is no other lustre superior 
to or more excellent than this lustre.' But you, Kaccana, although 
this lustre of a glow-worm or a fire-fly is feebler and poorer, say it is 
the highest lustre. And you do not point to that lustre. 

These five, Kaccana, are the strands of sense-pleasures. 3 Which 
five ? Material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant, 
liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. Sounds 
cognisable by the ear . , . Smells cognisable by the nose . , . Tastes 
cognisable by the tongue . . . Touches cognisable by the body, [43] 
agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, 
alluring. These, Kaccana, are the five strands of sense-pleasures. 
Whatever happiness, Kaccana, whatever pleasure arises in con- 
sequence of these five strands of sense-pleasure, this is called happiness 

in sense-pleasures. Thus, because of sense-pleasures there is 
happiness in sense-pleasures; from happiness in sense-pleasures the 
topmost happiness in sense-pleasures 4 is there accounted topmost." 
When this had been said, the wanderer Vekhanassa spoke thus to 

1 Kaccana (or Kaecayana) was the name of a gotta, a family or clan. 
Presumably therefore Vekhanassa belonged to this clan. 

8 Exactly as in the preceding Discourse, above, p. 230. 

3 As at M. i. 85. 4 MA. iii. 277 calls this nibbana. 



238 


80, Vekhamssasntta 


II. 43-44 


the Lord: " It is wonderful, good Gotama, it is marvellous, good 
Gotama. So far this is well spoken by the good Gotama : * Because 
of sense-pleasures there is happiness in sense-pleasures ; from happiness 
in sense-pleasures the topmost happiness in sense-pleasures is there 
accounted topmost/ ” 

“ Hard is this for you to understand, Kaccana — sense-pleasures, 
or the happiness in sense-pleasures, or the topmost happiness in 
sense-pleasures — you who are of another view, another allegiance, 
another objective, of a different observance and under a different 
teacher. 1 But those monks, Kaccana, who are perfected ones, the 
cankers destroyed, who have lived the life, done what was to be done, 
shed the burden, who have attained their own goal, the fetters of 
becoming utterly destroyed, and who are freed by perfect profound 
knowledge — these would know: sense-pleasures, or the happiness in 
sense-pleasures, or the topmost happiness in sense-pleasures.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Vekhanassa, angry and 
displeased, scorning even the Lord, despising even him, saying 2 even 
of him: “ The recluse Gotama shall be disgraced,” spoke thus to 
the Lord: “ But it is just that there are here some recluses and 
brahmans who, not knowing the past, not seeing the future, yet 
claim: ‘Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the Brahma-faring, 
done is what was to be done, there is no more of being such or so.’ 
This speech of theirs proves merely ridiculous, worthless, empty, 
void.” 3 

“ This censure is only just, Kaccana, for those recluses and brah- 
mans who, not knowing the past, [ 44 ] not seeing the future, yet 
claim: 1 Destroyed is birth . . . there is no more of being such or so.’ 
But, Kaccana, let be the past, let be the future. 4 Let there come an 
intelligent man, guileless, honest, straight, and who says: ‘ I instruct, 
I teach dhamma . 6 Faring along as instructed it will not be long 
before (some man) of himself will know, of himself will gee/ Even 
so, indeed, is deliverance from the direst bond — that is from the bond 
of ignorance. Kaccana, it is like a young baby boy lying on his 

1 As at if. i. 487. 

* vadamam h This passage is also found at if. ii. 200, D. I, 90; at the latter 
the reading is upavadamdno, insulting. 

* Cf. D. i. 240. 

4 As at if. ii. 32. MA . Hi. 278 says Gotama said this because the wanderer 
had no knowledge of former habitations making it suitable to talk about the 
past; and no knowledge of the t/eva -vision making it suitable to talk about 
the future. 

4 As at Fin. i. 9, where the sentence is attributed to Gotama himself. 



II. 44 


To Vekhanassa 


239 


back and bound around hia neck with a fivefold swaddling, it might 
be with swaddlings of thread. As he grows up and develops his 
faculties he would be released from those swaddlings, and in the 
absence of swaddlings he would know: * I am released.’ Even so, 
Kaccana, let there come intelligent man, guileless, honest, straight 
. . . Even so, indeed, is deliverance from the direst bond — that is from 
the bond of ignorance.” 

When this had been said, the wanderer Vekhanassa spoke thus 
to the Lord: “ It is excellent, good Gotama, excellent, good Gotama 
. . . May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple going for 
refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Vekhanassa: 

The Tenth 

Division on Wanderers: 

The Third 




IV. THE ROYAL DIVISION 

(Rajavagga) 




81 . DISCOURSE ON GHATIKARA 

(Ghatlkarasutta) 

[45] Thus have I heard : At one time 1 the Lord was walking on tour 
among the Kosalans together with a large Order of monks. Then 
the Lord, turning aside from the road, smiled (when he came to a) 
certain place. Then it occurred to the venerable Ananda: “ What 
is the cause, what the reason that the Lord is smiling ? Not without 
motive do Tathagatas smile.” Then the venerable Ananda, having 
arranged his robe over one shoulder, having saluted the Lord with 
joined palms, spoke thus to the Lord: “Now, revered sir, what is 
the cause, what the reason that the Lord is smiling ? Not without 
motive do Tathagatas smile.” 

“ Once upon a time, Ananda, in this district there was a village 
township called VebhaUhga, prosperous and wealthy and crowded 
with people. And, Ananda, the Lord Kassapa, perfected one, fully 
Self-Awakened One, lived depending on. the village township of 
Vebhajihga. At that time, Ananda, the monastery of the Lord 
Kassapa 2 . , . was here. At that time, Ananda, the Lord Kassapa 
. . . instructed an Order of monks while he was seated here.” 

Then the venerable Ananda, having laid down an outer cloak 
folded into four, spoke thus to the Lord: “Well then, revered sir, let 
the Lord sit down. This self-same piece of ground will (then) have 
been made use of by two perfected ones, fully Self-Awakened 
Ones.” Then the Lord sat down on an appointed seat. As he was 
seated the Lord spoke thus to the venerable Ananda: 

“ Once upon a time, Ananda, in this district (as above) . . . [46] 
the Lord Kassapa . . . instructed an Order of monks while he was 
seated here. And, Ananda, in the village township of Yebhalihga 
the potter named Ghafikara was a supporter — the chief supporter — 
of the Lord Kassapa . . . And, Ananda, a brahman youth named 


1 Cf. A. iii. 214-215 for the opening of this Discourse. For the whole 
episode, told with some interesting variations, see Mhvu . i. 317 ff.i {Mhvu. 
Translation i. 265 jf, in 8.B.B.). 

a Ail references in this Discourse to “ the Lord Kassapa ” are followed by 
the terms “ perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One.” I have omitted this 
full designation for reasons of space, 

243 



244 


81. Ghatlkdrasutta 


II. 46-47 


Jotipala 1 was a friend — a dear friend — of the potter Ghatikara. 
Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara addressed the brahman youth 
Jotipala, saying: ‘ Let us go, dear Jotipala, we will approach the 
Lord Kassapa ... so as to see him. A sight of this Lord, perfected 
one, fully Self-Awakened One, would be greatly prized by me.’ 
When this had been said, Ananda, the brahman youth Jotipala spoke 
thus to the potter Ghatikara : * Yes, dear Ghatikara, but of what 
use is it to see this little shaveling recluse V 

And a second time . . . And a third time, Ananda, did Ghatikara the 
potter speak thus to the brahman youth Jotipala: ‘ Let us go, dear 
Jotipala, we will approach the Lord Kassapa Yes, dear 

Ghatikara, but of what use is it to see this little shaveling recluse V 

* Well then, dear Jotipala, taking a back-scratcher and bath- 
powder, we will go to the river to bathe.* Ananda, the brahman 
youth Jotipala answered the potter Ghatikara in assent, saying: 
* Yes, dear.* 

Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara and the brahman youth 
Jotipala, taking a back-scratcher and bath-powder, went to the 
river to bathe. Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara spoke thus to 
the brahman youth Jotipala: ‘This, dear Jotipala, is near the 
monastery of the Lord Kassapa . . . Let us go, dear Jotipala, we will 
approach the Lord Kassapa ... so as to see him. A sight of this 
Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, would be greatly 
prized by me.* When this had been said, Ananda, the brahman 
youth Jotipala spoke thus to the potter Ghatikara : ‘ Yes, dear 
Ghatikara, but [47] of what use is it to see this little shaveling 
recluse V 

And a second time . . . And a third time, Ananda, did Ghatikara 
the potter speak thus to the brahman youth Jotipala: ‘ This, dear 
Jotipala, is near the monastery of the Lord Kassapa ... A sight of 
this Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, would be greatly 
prized by me.* And a third time, Ananda, did the brahman youth 
Jotipala speak thus to the potter Ghatikara: * Yes, dear Ghatikara, 
but of what use is it to see this little shaveling recluse V 

Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara, having laid hold of the 
brahman youth Jotipala by the waist-band, spoke thus: ‘ This, dear 

1 At D. ii. 230 called the son of the brahman Govinda. At Ja. i. 43 called 
the Bodhisatta; see also the end of this Discourse. Cf. Bvdv, xxv. 10 
Miln 221 jf. Also see the point of controversy at Kvu. 286 as to whether 
the Bodhisatta was a Brahma -farer and following the (right) method at the 
time of the Buddha Kassapa. 



II. 47-48 


245 


On Ghatikara 

Jotipala, is near the monastery of the Lord Kassapa . . . Let us go, 
dear Jotipala, we will approach the Lord Kassapa so as to see him, 
A sight of this Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, would 
be greatly prized by me/ Then, Ananda, the brahman youth 
Jotipala, having disengaged his waist-band, spoke thus to the potter 
Ghatikara: * Yes, dear Ghatikara, but of what use is it to see this 
little shaveling recluse V Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara, 
having laid hold of the brahman youth Jotipala by the hair — he had 
just performed an ablution of his head — spoke thus: * This, dear 
Jotipala, is near the monastery of the Lord Kassapa . , . Let us go 
... A sight of this Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, 
would be greatly prized by me/ 

Then, Ananda, it occurred to the brahman youth Jotipala : * Indeed 
it is wonderful, indeed it is marvellous, that this potter Ghatikara, 
being of lowly birth, should lay hold of my hair although I have 
performed an ablution of my head/ and should think: 4 Indeed this 1 
surely cannot be insignificant/ He spoke thus to the potter Ghati- 
kara: 4 Is it really necessary, 2 dear Ghatikara V 4 It is really neces- 
sary, dear Jotipala, most surely [48] a sight of this Lord, perfected 
one, fully Self- Awakened One, would be greatly prized by me/ 

4 Well then, dear Ghatikara, let go (of my hair) ; we will get along/ 

Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatikara and the brahman youth Joti- 
pala approached the Lord Kassapa . . . When they had approached, 
Ghatikara the potter greeted the Lord Kassapa . . . and sat down at 
a respectful distance. But the brahman youth Jotipala exchanged 
greetings with the Lord Kassapa » , . and having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
And, Ananda, as the potter Ghatikara was sitting down at a respect- 
ful distance, he spoke thus to the Lord Kassapa . . . : 4 Revered 
sir, this brahman youth Jotipala is my friend — my dear friend. 
Let the Lord teach him dhamma / Then, Ananda, the Lord 
Kassapa . . . gladdened, roused, incited, delighted the potter 
Ghatikara and the brahman youth Jotipala, with talk on dham - 


1 “ This going (gamana) of ours (to visit the Lord) Cannot be insignificant 
or small; it will be great,” MA. iii. 281. The text here may be slightly 
confused, see v. IL at M. ii. 47. But all the time Jotipala was more and more 
coming over to the idea of visiting the Lord Kassapa. 

* yavektdohi pi. MA. iii. 281 gives the meaning as yavetaparamath , and 
the sense as; In order to go there, is all this exertion necessary; from pleading, 
seizing hold of my waist-band and letting it go, and then to the length of 
taking hold of my hair ? 



246 81. Ghatikdrasutta II. 48-49 

ma. 1 Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatlkara and the brahman youth 
Jotipala, gladdened, roused, incited, delighted by the Lord Kassapa’s 
. . . talk on dhamma , having rejoiced in what the Lord Kassapa . . . 
had said, having given thanks and risen from their seats, greeting the 
Lord Kassapa . . . they departed keeping their right sides towards him. 

Then, Ananda, the brahman youth Jotipala spoke thus to the 
potter Ghatlkara : ‘ How is it that you, dear Ghatlkara, on hearing 
this dhamma , do not go forth from home into homelessness V 

‘ But, dear Jotipala, do you not know that I look after my blind 
and ageing parents V 

‘ Well then, dear Ghatlkara, I will go forth from home into home- 
lessness.' 

Then, Ananda, the potter Ghatlkara and the brahman youth 
Jotipala approached the Lord Kassapa . . . ; [49] having approached 
and having greeted the Lord Kassapa . . . they sat down at a respect- 
ful distance. And, Ananda, as Ghatlkara the potter was sitting 
down at a respectful distance, he spoke thus to the Lord Kassapa . » . : 
* Revered sir, this brahman youth Jotipala is my friend — my dear 
friend. May the Lord let him go forth.' Ananda, Jotipala the 
brahman youth received the going forth in the presence of the Lord 
Kassapa 2 . . ., he received the ordination. Then, Ananda, not long 
after the brahman youth Jotipala had received ordination — half a 
month after his ordination — the Lord Kassapa . . ,, having stayed at 
Vcbhalihga for as long as he found suitable, set out on tour for 
Benares; walking on tour, in due course he arrived at Benares. 

While he was there, Ananda, the Lord Kassapa . . . stayed near 
Benares at Isipatana in the deer-park. Ananda, Kikl, the king of 
Kasi, heard that the Lord Kassapa . . . had arrived at Benares and 
was staying near Benares at Isipatana in the deer-park. Then, 
Ananda, Kikl, the king of Kasi, having had many lovely vehicles 
harnessed, having mounted a lovely vehicle, set off for Benares with 
the many lovely vehicles and with great royal pomp so as to see the 
Lord Kassapa . . . For as long as the ground was possible for a 
vehicle he went in the vehicle, then having dismounted from it, he 
approached the Lord Kassapa ... on foot; having approached and 
having greeted the Lord Kassapa ... he sat down at a respectful 
distance. Ananda, as Kikl, the king of Kasi, was sitting down at a 
respectful distance, the Lord Kassapa . . . roused, incited, gladdened 

1 MA. iii. 282 says that this was concerned with the attainment of mind- 
fulness. 

8 MA. iii. 282 says that Bodhisattas go forth in the presence of Buddhas. 



II. 49-51 On Ohatlkara 247 

and delighted him with talk on dhamma . Then, Ananda, Kikl, the 
king of Kasi, roused . , . delighted by the Lord Kassapa . . . with talk 
on dhamma , spoke thus to the Lord Kassapa , . 

[50] * Revered sir, may the Lord consent to a meal with me on the 
morrow together with the Order of monks/ Ananda, the Lord 
Kassapa consented by becoming silent. Then, Ananda, Kikl the 
king of Kasi, having understood the Lord Kassapa’s consent, rising 
from his seat and greeting the Lord Kassapa, departed keeping his 
right side towards him. Then, Ananda, towards the end of that 
night when Kikl, the king of Kasi, had had sumptuous foods, solid and 
soft, prepared in his own dwelling : dry yellow rices, 1 various curries, 
the black grains removed, and various condiments, he had the time 
announced to the Lord Kassapa, saying: ‘ It is time, revered sir, the 
meal is ready/ 

Then, Ananda, the Lord Kassapa, having dressed in the morning, 
taking his bowl and robe, approached the dwelling of Kikl, the king 
of Kasi; having approached, he sat down on the appointed seat 
together with the Order of monks. Then, Ananda, Kiki, the king of 
Kasi, with his own hand served and satisfied with sumptuous foods, 
solid and soft, the Order of monks with the Awakened One at its 
head. Then, Ananda, when the Lord Kassapa had eaten and had 
withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Kikl, the king of Kasi, taking a 
low seat, sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance, Kikl, the king of Kasi spoke thus to the Lord 
Kassapa: 4 Revered sir, may the Lord consent to (accept) my rains- 
residence in Benares; there will be suitable support for the Order/ 

‘ No, sire, I have (already) consented to (accept) a rains-residence/ 
And a second time . . . And a third time, Ananda, did Kiki, the king 
of Kasi, speak thus to the Lord Kassapa , . . : * Revered sir, may the 
Lord consent to (accept) my rains-residence in Benares; there will be 
suitable support for the Order/ 

‘ No, sire, I have (already) consented to (accept) a rains -residence/ 
Then, Ananda, Kikl, the king of Kasi thought : * The Lord Kassapa 
[ 51 ] , . . does not consent to (accept) my rains-residence in Benares/ 
and he was depressed and grieved. 2 Then, Ananda, Kikl, the king 
of Kasi, spoke thus to the Lord Kassapa . . . : * Then, have you, 
revered sir, some other supporter than me V 

i There is, sire, a village township called Vebhajinga. There is a 

1 pandumutikassa salino . MA. iii. 283 says: mujake katva suklchapilassa 
rattasalino. Tassa kira salino vappahdlato pai$haya ayam pariharo. 
a As at if. i. 448, 457. 



248 81. Qhajftkarasutta II. 51-52 

potter there called Ghatikara ; he is my supporter — the chief supporter. 
But you, sire, think: The Lord Kassapa ... does not consent to 
(accept) my rains-residence in Benares, and you are depressed and 
grieved. This is not so with the potter Ghatikara and nor can it be 
so. For, sire, the potter Ghatikara has gone to the Awakened One 
for refuge, he has gone to dhamma for refuge, he has gone to the 
Order for refuge. Ghatikara, the potter, sire, is restrained from 
onslaught on creatures, restrained from taking what has not been 
given, restrained from wrong enjoyment of sense-pleasures, restrained 
from lying speech, restrained from occasions of sloth engendered by 
strong drink and spirits. Ghatikara the potter, sire, is possessed of 
unwavering confidence in the Awakened One ... in dhamma . . . the 
Order, he is possessed of moral habits that are dear to the ariyans. 
Ghatikara the potter, sire, doubts not about anguish . . . the uprising 
of anguish . . . the stopping of anguish, he doubts not about the 
course leading to the stopping of anguish. Ghatikara the potter, 
sire, is a one-meal-man, a Brahma-farer, virtuous, lovely in charac- 
ter. Ghatikara the potter, sire, is one who has laid aside jewels and 
wrought gold, who is without gold and silver, Ghatikara the potter, 
sire, does not dig the earth either with a spade or with his own hand; 
willingly he makes a vessel from the soil of a bank that is crumbling 
or scratched out by rats and dogs, and he speaks thus: “ He that 
likes, if he lays down fragments of husked rice here, fragments of 
kidney-beans, fragments of chick-peas, may take whatever he likes.” 1 
Ghatikara the potter, sire, looks after his blind [52] ageing parents. 
Ghatikara the potter, sire, by the destruction of the five fetters 
binding to this lower (shore), is of spontaneous uprising, he attains 
final nibbana there, he is not liable to return from that world. 

At one time I, sire, was staying in the village township of Veb- 
hajinga. Then I, sire, having dressed in the morning, taking my 
bowl and robe, approached the parents of the potter Ghatikara; 
having approached, I spoke thus to the parents of the potter 
Ghatikara: “ Now, where has this potter 2 gone f” “ Revered sir, 
your supporter has gone out, saying: Now, having taken conjey from 
the pot, having taken curry from the cauldron, enjoy them.” 


1 MA. iii. 284-5 says he does net trade in the vessels he has fired. But once 
people know they can take what they like, they bring him useful materials 
from the forest. 

1 bhaggava; cf. Kumbhakarajataka , and see PED. This that “seems to 
have been a generic name for all potters ” is here not “ a special form of 
address,” as suggested in DPPN. 



II. 52-53 


249 


On Qhafikdra 

Then I, sire, having taken conjey from the pot, having taken curry 
from the cauldron, enjoyed them, and rising up from my seat I 
departed. Then, sire, Ghatikara the potter approached his parents; 
having approached, he spoke thus to his parents: “ Who is it that, 
having taken conjey from the pot, having taken curry from the 
cauldron and having enjoyed them, is going away ?” “ It is the 
Lord Kassapa . . dear, that, having taken conjey ... is going away.” 
Then, sire, it occured to Ghatikara the potter: “ Indeed it is a gain 
for me, indeed it is well gotten by me that the Lord Kassapa . . . has 
such trust in me.” Then, sire, joy and happiness did not leave 
Ghatikara the potter for half a month or his parents for seven days. 

At one time I, sire, was staying in this very village township of 
Vebhajinga. Then I, sire, having dressed in the morning . . . (as 
above) . . . spoke thus to the parents of the potter Ghatikara: “ Now, 
where has this potter gone ?” “ Revered sir, your supporter has 

gone out, saying : Now, having taken boiled rice from the pan, having 
taken curry from the cauldron, enjoy them.” Then I, sire, having 
taken boiled rice from the pan, having taken curry from the cauldron, 
[53] enjoyed them, and rising up from my seat I departed. Then, 
sire, the potter Ghatikara approached his parents ... (as above, 
reading; having taken boiled rice from the pan, having taken curry 
from the cauldron) . . . Then, sire, joy and happiness did not leave the 
potter Ghatikara for half a month or his parents for seven days. 

At one time I, sire, was staying in this very village township of 
Vebhalioga. At that time the hut leaked. So I, sire, addressed the 
monks, saying: “ Go, monks, and find out if there is grass in the 
dwelling of Ghatikara the potter.” When this had been said, sire, 
the monks spoke thus to me: “ There is no grass, revered sir, in the 
dwelling of Ghatikara the potter, but his house has a grass roof.” 
“ Go, monks, and strip the grass from the house of Ghatikara the 
potter.” Then, sire, these monks stripped the grass from the house 
of Ghatikara the potter. Then, sire, the parents of Ghatikara the 
potter spoke thus to the monks: “ Who are they that are stripping 
the grass from the house ?” " Sister,” the monks said, “ the Lord 
Kassapa’s hut is leaking.” “ Take it, revered sirs, take it, my 
honourable friends.” 1 Then, sire, Ghatikara the potter approached 
his parents; having approached, he spoke thus to his parents: “ Who 
are they that have stripped the grass from the house ?” “ Monks, 


1 bhadramukha , as at M. ii. 210; S. i. 74. In translating the word thus, 
I follow the note at K.S. i. 100. 



260 


II. 63-64 


81, QhcUtkdraautta 

dear; the hut of the Lord Kassapa ... is leaking.” Then, sire, it 
occurred to Ghatikara the potter; “ Indeed it is a gain for me, indeed 
it is well gotten by me that the Lord Kassapa . , . has such trust in 
me.” Then, sire, joy and happiness did not leave the potter 
Ghatikara [64] for half a month or his parents for seven days. Then, 
sire, for a whole three months 1 that house stood with its roof open 
to the sky, but it did not rain into it. Such a one, sire, is Ghatikara 
the potter/ 

‘ It is a gain, revered sir, it is well gotten, revered sir, by Ghatikara 
the potter in whom the Lord has such trust/ 

Then, Ananda, Kiki, the king of Kasi, sent as many as five hundred 
cartloads of husked rice to Ghatikara the potter, dry yellow rices and 
suitable curries. 2 Then, Ananda, these king's men, having ap- 
proached Ghatikara the potter, spoke thus: ‘These five hundred 
cartloads of husked rice, revered sir, have been sent to you by Kiki, 
the king of Kasi, with dry yellow rices and suitable curries. Accept 
them, revered sir.' * The king is very busy, there is much to be done. 
I am quite satisfied since this is for me from the king/ 

It may be, Ananda, that this will occur to you: ‘ Now, at that 
time the brahman youth Jotipala was someone else/ But this, 
Ananda, should not be thought of in this way. I, at that time, was 
Jotipala the brahman youth.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Ananda rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on Ghatikara : 

The First 


82. DISCOURSE WITH RATTHAPALA 

(Ratthapalasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord, walking on tour among the 
Kurus together with a large Order of monks arrived at the market 

1 MA. iii. 286 says that the Lord had already passed one of the four months 
of the rains before he sent for the grass thatch. 

a These were to be for him and the Order of monks for three months, 
MA. iii. 287. 




II. 54-55 


251 


With Ratthapdla 

town of the Kurus called Thullakotthita. The brahmans and house- 
holders of Thullakotthita heard : “ Indeed the recluse Gotama, the 
son of the Sakyans, gone forth from the Sakyan family, [55] walking 
on tour among the Kurus together with a large Order of monks has 
arrived at Thullakotthita. A lovely report about the revered Gotama 
has gone forth thus: * This Lord is perfected, wholly Self- Awakened, 
endowed with (right) knowledge and conduct, well-farer, knower of 
the worlds, incomparable charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of 
devas and men, the Awakened One, the Lord. He makes known this 
world with the devas, with Mara, with Brahma, creation with its 
recluses and brahmans, its devas and men, having realised them by his 
own super-knowledge. With the meaning and the spirit he teaches 
dhamma that is lovely in the beginning, lovely in the middle, lovely 
at the ending; he proclaims the Brahma-faring wholly fulfilled, quite 
purified. It were good to see perfected ones like this.’ ” 

Then the brahmans and householders of Thullakotthita approached 
the Lord; having approached, some, having greeted the Lord, sat 
down at a respectful distance; some exchanged greetings with the 
Lord, and having conversed in a friendly and courteous way, sat 
down at a respectful distance; some, having saluted the Lord with 
joined palms, sat down at a respectful distance; some, having made 
known their names and clans in the Lord’s presence, sat down at a 
respectful distance; some, becoming silent, sat down at a respectful 
distance. As the brahmans and householders of Thullakotthita 
were sitting down at a respectful distance, the Lord gladdened, 
roused, incited and delighted them with a talk on dhamma . 

Now at that time a young man of family named Ratthapala, 1 the 
son of a leading family in that very Thullakotthita, was sitting down 
in this assembly. Then it occurred to Ratthapala, the young man 
of family: 2 “ In so far as I understand dhamma taught by the 
Lord, it is no easy matter for one living in a house to fare the Brahma- 
faring completely fulfilled, completely pure and polished like a 
conch-shell. Suppose that I, having cut off hair and beard, having 

donned saffron garments, should go forth from home into homeless- 

ness V* 

Then the brahmans and householders of Thullakotthita, gladdened, 
roused, incited and delighted by the Lord’s talk on dhamma , rejoicing 

1 At A. ii. 24 called chief of those gone forth from faith. 

* The story of Ratthapala’s efforts to be ordained and of the events 
immediately following is very similar to the story of Sudinna at Vin . iii. 12 j^. 
There are also some interesting variations. 




262 82. Ratthapdlasutta II. 66-57 

in what the Lord had said and giving thanks for it, [ 68 ] rising from 
their seats and greeting the Lord, departed keeping their right sides 
towards him. And not long after the brahmans and householders of 
Thullakotthita had departed, Ratthapala, the young man of family, 
approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, 
he sat down at a respectful distance; sitting down at a respectful 
distance, he spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ In so far as I, revered sir, understand dhamma taught by the 
Lord, it is no easy matter for one living in a house to fare the Brahma- 
faring completely fulfilled, completely pure and polished like a 
conch-shell. I wish, revered sir, having cut off hair and beard, 
having donned saffron garments, to go forth from home into home- 
lessness. May I, revered sir, receive the going forth in the Lord’s 
presence, may I receive ordination.” 

“ But have you, Ratthapala, your parents, consent for going forth 
from home into homelessness V* 

“ I have not, revered sir, the consent of my parents for going forth 
from home into homelessness.” 

“ Ratthapala, Tathagatas do not allow (one 1 ) to go forth without 
the consent of the parents.” 

“ I, revered sir, will do whatever is necessary so that my parents 
will consent to my going forth from home into homelessness.” 

Then Ratthapala, the young man of family, having greeted the 
Lord keeping his right side towards him, rising from his seat 
approached his parents; having approached, he spoke thus to his 
parents : 

“ Mother and father, in so far as I understand dhamma taught by 
the Lord, it is no easy matter for one living in a house to fare the 
Brahma-faring completely fulfilled, completely pure, and polished 
like a conch-shell. I wish, having cut off hair and beard, having 
donned saffron garments, to go forth from home into homelessness. 
Consent to my going forth from home into homelessness.” 

When this had been said, the parents of Ratthapala, the young 
man of family, spoke thus to him: “ You, dear Ratthapala, are our 
only child, dear and beloved, you live in comfort and are well cared 
for ; you, dear Ratthapala, do not know anything of suffering. Come 
you, dear Ratthapala, eat [67] and drink and amuse yourself; eating, 
drinking and amusing yourself, you can enjoy diverting yourself with 
sense-pleasures and doing meritorious things. We do not consent 

1 puUarh , of Fin. Hi- 12 (and c/. Fin. i. 83) is omitted here, perhaps because 
Ratthapala was at this time rather more than a child. 




II. 57-68 


253 


With Ratthapala 

that you should go forth from home into homelessness. If you were 
to die we should be desolate without you. How could we, while you 
are living, consent to your going forth from home into homeless- 
ness?” 

And a second time . . . And a third time Ratthapala, the young 
man of family, spoke thus to his parents: “ Mother and father, in so 
far as I understand dhamma . . . Consent to my going forth from home 
into homelessness/’ And a second . . . And a third time the parents 
of Ratthapala, the young man of family, spoke thus to him: “ You, 
dear Ratthapala, are our only child . . . How could we, while you are 
living, consent to your going forth from home into homelessness ?” 

Then Ratthapala, the young man of family, not receiving his 
parents’ consent, lay down there on the bare ground and said : “ Here 
will there be death for me or going forth.” 

[58] Then the parents of Ratthapala, the young man of family, 
spoke thus to him: “You, dear Ratthapala, are our only child, 
dear and beloved, you live in comfort and are well cared for; 
you, dear Ratthapala, do not know anything of suffering. Get 
up, deaT Ratthapala, eat and drink and amuse yourself; eating, 
drinking, amusing yourself you can enjoy diverting yourself with 
sense-pleasures and doing meritorious things. We do not consent 
that you should go forth from home into homelessness. If you were 
to die we should be desolate without you. How could we, while 
you are living, consent to your going forth from home into 
homelessness V* 

When this had been said, Ratthapala, the young man of family, 
was silent. And a second . . . And a third time the parents of 
Ratthapala, the young man of family, spoke thus to him: “ You, 
dear Ratthapala, are our only child . . . How could we, while you are 
living, consent to your going forth from home into homelessness ?” 
And a second . . . And a third time Ratthapala, the young man of 
family, was silent. 

Then the parents of Ratthapala, the young man of family, 

approached his friends ; having approached, they spoke thus to them ; 
“ This Ratthapala, the young man of family, is lying down on the 
bare ground, dears, and saying: 4 Here will there be death for me or 
going forth/ Come, dears, approach Ratthapala, the young man of 
family; having approached, speak thus to him: * You, good Rattha- 
pala, are your parents’ only child, dear and beloved, you live in 
comfort and are well cared for; you, good Ratthapala, do not know 
anything of suffering. Get up, good Ratthapala, eat and drink and 



254 82. RatthapdlasuUa II, 58-60 

amuse yourself; eating, drinking and amusing yourself, you can 
enjoy diverting yourself with sense-pleasures and doing meritorious 
things. Your parents do not consent that you should go forth from 
home into homelessness. If you were to die your parents would 
be desolate [59] without you. How can they, while you are living, 
consent to your going forth from home into homelessness V ” 

Then the friends of Ratthapala, the young man of family, having 
answered his parents in assent, approached Ratthapala, the young 
man of family; and having approached, they spoke thus to him: 
“ You, good Ratthapala, are your parents’ only child . . . How can 
they, while you are living, consent to your going forth from home 
into homelessness V* When this had been said, Ratthapala, the 
young man of family, was silent. And a second. . . And a third time 
did the friends of Ratthapala, the young man of family, speak thus to 
him: “ You, good Ratthapala, are your parents’ only child . . . How 
can they, while you are living, consent to your going forth from 
home into homelessness V* And a second . . . And a third time, 
Ratthapala, the young man of family, was silent. 

Then the friends of Ratthapala, the young man of family, 
approached his parents; and having approached, they spoke thus 
to them: “ Mother and father, this Ratthapala, the young man of 
family, is lying on the bare ground there saying: ‘ Here will there 
be death for me or going forth.’ [60] If you do not consent that 
Ratthapala, the young man of family, should go forth from home 
into homelessness, he will die there. But if you consent to his going 
forth from home into homelessness, after he has gone forth you may 
see him again. If Ratthapala, the young man of family, does not 
enjoy the going forth from home into homelessness, what alternative 
will there be for him ? He will come back here. Consent to the 
going forth from home into homelessness of Ratthapala, the young 
man of family.” 

*' ‘ We consent, dears, to the going forth from home into homeless- 
ness of Ratthapala, the young man of family. But after he has 
gone forth, he must come and see us.” 

Then the friends of Ratthapala, the young man of family, 
approached him; and having approached, they spoke thus to him: 

“ You, good Ratthapala, are your parents’ only child, dear and 
beloved, you live in comfort and are well cared for; you, good 
Ratthapala, do not know anything of suffering. Get up, eat and 
drink and amuse yourself; eating, drinking and amusing yourself, 
you can enjoy diverting yourself with sense-pleasures and doing 



II. 60-61 


255 


With Ratthapala 

meritorious things. Your parents have consented to your going 
forth from home into homelessness, but after you have gone forth 
you must see your parents.” 

Then Ratthapala, the young man of family, having got up and 
regained his strength, approached the Lord; having approached, 
having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance, Ratthapala, the young 
man of family, spoke thus to the Lord: 11 1, revered sir, have my 
parents’ consent for the going forth from home into homelessness. 
May the Lord let me go forth.” Ratthapala, the young man of 
family, received the going forth in the Lord’s presence, he received 
ordination. 

Not long after the venerable Ratthapala had been ordained — half 
a month after he had been ordained — the Lord, having stayed for as 
long as he found suitable in Thullakotthita, set out on tour for 
Savatthi; and in due course, walking on tour, he arrived at Savatthi. 
While he was there [ 61 ] the Lord stayed near Savatthi in the Jeta 
Grove in Anathapin^ika’s monastery. Then the venerable Rattha- 
pala, dwelling alone, aloof, diligent, ardent, self-resolute, having soon 
realised here and now by his own super-knowledge that incomparable 
goal of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men of family 
rightly go forth from home into homelessness, entering on it, he 
abided in it. And he knew: “ Destroyed is birth, brought to a close 
the Brahma-faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of 
being such or so.” And the venerable Ratthapala was one of the 
perfected ones. 

Then the venerable Ratthapala approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful* 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
venerable Ratthapala spoke thus to the Lord: “ I want, revered sir, 
to see my parents, if the Lord allows me.” 

Then the Lord with his mind carefully reflected on the venerable 
Ratthapala’s reasoning of n ind. When the Lord knew that it was 

impossible for the venerable Ratthapala, throwing off the training, 

to return to the secular life, then the Lord spoke thus to the venerable 
Ratthapala : “ Do now, Ratthapala, that for which you think it is the 
right time.” 

Then the venerable Ratthapala, rising from his seat, having greeted 
the Lord keeping his right side towards him, having packed away his 
bedding, set out on tour for Thullakotthita taking his bowl and robe; 
and in due course, walking on tour, he arrived at Thullakotthita, 



256 82. Ratthapalasutta II. 61-62 

While he was there, the venerable Rafthapala stayed near Thullakoft- 
hita in the deer-park of the Kuril king. Then the venerable Rattha- 
pala, dressing in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, entered Thul- 
lakotthita for almsfood; while he was walking on an uninterrupted 
round for almsfood, he approached his own parents* house. Now at 
that time the venerable Ratthapala’sfatherwas having his haircombed 
in the middle hall which had a door. 1 He saw the venerable Rattha- 
pala coming in the distance, and seeing him, he spoke thus: “ Our 
only son, dear and beloved, has gone forth among these shaveling 
recluses.” [62] And the venerable Ratthapala received neither alms 
nor a refusal 2 at his own father’s house; all he received was 
abuse. 

Now at that time the woman slave of the venerable Ratthapala’s 
relations wanted to throw away the previous evening’s barley- 
gruel. But the venerable Ratthapala spoke thus to her: “ If that, 
sister, is to be thrown away, put it here in my bowl.” Then as the 
woman slave of the venerable Ratthapala’s relations was putting the 
previous evening’s barley-gruel into his bowl she recognised his 
hands and feet and voice. So the woman slave of the venerable 
Ratthapala’s relations approached his mother, and having ap- 
proached, she spoke thus to her: “ If it please you, madam, you 
should know that the young master Ratthapala is back.” 

“ Now then, if you speak the truth, you are a freed woman.” 
Then the venerable Ratthapala’s mother approached his father; and 
having approached, she spoke thus to his father: “ If it please you, 
householder, you should know that Ratthapala, the young man of 
family, is indeed back.” 

Now at that time the venerable Ratthapala was eating the 
previous evening’s barley-gruel in a room provided for the purpose. 3 
Then the venerable Ratthapala’s father approached him; having 
approached, he spoke thus to him: “ Can it be, dear Ratthapala, 

1 MA . iii. 295 says: at the porch of the door in the middle of a house with 
seven porched doors. See above, p. 47. 

* A refusal would mean that without waiting longer the bhikkhu could pass 
on to the next house; and might receive the necessary alms there. 

* kuddarh niasaya. Perhaps “ leaning against a wall.** But MA . iii. 297 
says “ in that district there were halls in benefactors’ houses, where seats 
were prepared and vessels of water, and where those who had gone forth sat 
down and ate when they were walking for alms. . . . For those who have 
gone forth do not sit down to eat in unsuitable places as do beggars.” The 
exact meaning of kudda (v.l. kutta, kudda - and kuttamula) in this passage is 
however not clear. 



II. 62-64 With Ratthapala 257 

that you are eating last evening’s barley-gruel ? Surely, dear 
RaUhapala, you should come into your own home ?” 

“ Where, householder, is there a home for us who have gone forth 
from home into homelessness ? We are houseless ones, householder. 
I did come [63] to your home, householder; but I received neither 
alms there nor a refusal; all I received was abuse.” 

“ Come, dear Ratthapala, we will go to the house.” 

“ No, householder, I have done with eating for today.” 

“ Well then, dear Ratthapala, consent to a meal on the morrow.” 

The venerable Ratthapala consented by becoming silent. And 
when the venerable Ratthapala’s father had understood that he had 
consented, he went up to his own dwelling; and having gone there, he 
had a great heap made of gold coins and gold, and having had them 
hidden with screens, he summoned the venerable Ratthapala’s 
former wives, and said: “ Come you, daughters-in-law, adorn your- 
selves with the adornments adorned with which you used to be dear 
to Ratthapala, the young man of family, and beloved by him.” 
And towards the end of that night the venerable Ratthapala’s 
father, having had sumptuous foods, solid and soft, prepared in his 
own dwelling, had the time announced to the venerable Ratthapala, 
saying : “ It is time, dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready.” Then the 
venerable Ratthapala, having dressed in the morning, taking his 
bowl and robe, approached his own father’s dwelling; having ap- 
proached, he sat down on the seat made ready. And the venerable 
Ratthapala’s father, having had that heap of gold coins and gold 
uncovered, spoke thus to the venerable Ratthapala : 

“ This, dear Ratthapala, is your mother’s wealth, the other is your 
father’s, the other your paternal grandfather’s. 1 It is possible, dear 
Ratthapala, both to enjoy riches and do meritorious things. Come 
you, dear [64] Ratthapala, throwing off the training and returning to 
the secular life, enjoy riches and do meritorious things.” 

“ If you, householder, would do my bidding, having loaded this 
heap of gold coins and gold into wagons, and then having had it 
brought down, you would have it dropped in the middle stream of 
the river Ganges. What is the reason for this ? It is from that 
source, householder, that there will arise for you grief, sorrow, 
suffering,* lamentation and despair.” 

Taking hold of his feet, the venerable Ratthapala’s former wives 


1 pitamakarh , perhaps more exactly “ ancestors’.” 



258 82. RaUhapdlasutta II. 64-65 

then spoke thus to him : “ Now, young master, of what kind are those 
nymphs for whose sake you fare the Brahma-faring V 9 

“ We, sisters, do not fare the Brahma-faring for the sake of 
nymphs.” 

Saying, “ The young master Rafthapala addresses us with the 
word 1 * sisters/ ” they fell down fainting just there. Then the 
venerable Rafthapala spoke thus to his father: 

“ If you would give food, householder, give it; but do not annoy 
us.” 

Eat, dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready.” Then the venerable 
Ratthapala’s father with his own hand served and satisfied the 
venerable Ra^hapala with sumptuous food, solid and soft. And 
when the venerable RaJtbapala had eaten and had withdrawn his 
hand from the bowl, standing he spoke these verses: 1 

11 See 8 the pranked-out puppet-shape, 3 a mass of sores, a congeries, 4 * 
afflicted, much thought of, 6 * for which there is never stability. 

See the pranked-out form with jewels and rings, 

the bones sheathed in skin, resplendent with the clothes, 

The feet dyed with lac, the face with powder smeared — 
enough for delusion of a fool, but not for the quester of the 
Beyond. 

[65] Hair braided eightfold, eyes with collyrium smeared — 
enough for delusion of a fool, but not for the quester of the 
Beyond. 

Like a new collyxium-box, embossed, is the foul body, adorned — 
enough for delusion of a fool, but not for the quester of the 
Beyond. 

The trapper set a snare ; the deer touched not the net. 

Having eaten the crop, we go while the deer-catchers lament.” 


1 Verses as at Thag . 769-774, there also ascribed to Ratthapala. The 
remainder of his verses are at M. ii. 72-74 (Thag. 776-788), with the exception 
of Thag. ver. 776, 789-793 which occur only there. 

* This verse also occurs at Dhp. 147, being spoken, according to DhA. iii. 
104 on account of Sirima, the beautiful courtesan of Rajagaha. 

3 bimba, a shape, image; cf. S. i. 134. MA. iii. 30I=DA4. iii. 109= 
Thag A. explain by altabhava . 

4 samussitarh. MA. iii. 302 says that, with 300 bones, held together by 

900 sinews, smeared with 900 lumps of flesh, it is built up (ussita, erected?) 

on every side. 

* bahusamkapparh , by others. 



II. 65-66 With Ratthapala 259 

After the venerable Rafthapala had spoken these verses while he 
was standing, he approached the deer-park of the Kuril king \ l * having 
approached, he sat down for the day-sojourn at the root of a tree. 

Then the Kuru king addressed a trapper, 8 saying: “Clear a 
pleasure-ground, good trapper, in the deer-park; we will go to see the 
lovely ground.” 

“ Yes, sire,” and when the trapper had answered the Kuru king in 
assent, he saw, while he was clearing the deer-park, the venerable 
Ratthapala sitting down for the day-sojourn at the root of a tree ; on 
seeing him, he approached the Kuru king, and having approached, he 
spoke thus to him; 

“ Sire, the deer-park is cleared; but there is the young man of 
family, Ratthapala, the son of a leading family near this very Thulla- 
kotthita, and whom you have constantly praised, sitting at the root 
of a tree for the day-sojourn.” 

“ Well then, good trapper, no more now today of the pleasure- 
ground, but we will now at once pay respects to the revered Ra$ha- 
pala,” and when he had said: “ Give away all the solid and soft food 
that has been prepared,” he had many lovely vehicles harnessed, and 
having mounted a lovely vehicle, he set forth from Thullakotthita 
in great royal pomp with the many lovely vehicles so as to see the 
venerable Ratthapala. Having gone by vehicle for as far as the 
ground was passable, and having then descended from the vehicle, 
with his princely train he approached the venerable Ratthapala on 
foot; having approached, [ 66 ] he exchanged greetings with the 
venerable Ratthapala; and having conversed in a friendly and 
courteous way, he stood at a respectful distance. As he was standing 
at a respectful distance, the Kuru king spoke thus to the venerable 
Ratthapala: 

“ Let the revered Ratthapala sit down here on the elephant- 
rug.” 3 * * * * 


1 raja Koravyo , It is not clear whether Koravya was his personal name or 

a generic name of the king of the Kurus, See DPPN. s.y. Korabya. 

* migava . MA. iii, 304 says this is the name of the keeper of the pleasaunce. 

If so, his name was derived from his occupation. The same word has already 

occurred in the first line of the last verse above, and there in no way seems 

to be a proper name. Chalmers translates as “ huntsman.* 9 As a proper 

name migava is not included in DPPN. Moreover, in Pali, a proper name is 

usually further defined to show who the person was: brahman, householder, 
king and so on. 

9 As at M. ii. 113. Had the word hatthatthara not been translated as 
“ clump of flowers ” by Chalmers, it would have needed no comment. As it is, 



260 82, RaUhapalasutta II. 66-67 

“ No, sire ; you sit down, I am sitting on a seat of my own.” The 
Kuru king sat down on the prepared seat; while he was sitting down 
the Kuru king spoke thus to the venerable Rafthapala: 

“ Good Ratthapala, there are these four kinds of loss followed by 
which some (men) here, having cut off hair and beard, having donned 
saffron garments, go forth from home into homelessness. What are 
the four ? Loss through old age, loss through illness, loss of wealth, 
loss of relations. And what, good Rafthapala, is loss through old 
age ? As to this, good Rafthapala, someone is worn, old, full of 
years, has lived his span and is at the close of his life. He reflects 
thus: ‘ I am now worn, old, full of years, I have lived my span and 
am at the close of my life, so it is not easy for me to acquire wealth not 
already acquired or to use to advantage the wealth already acquired. 
Suppose that I, having cut off hair and beard, having donned saffron 
garments, should go forth from home into homelessness V So he 
that is followed by this loss through old age, having cut off hair and 
beard, having donned saffron garments, goes forth from home into 
homelessness. Good Ratthapala, this is called loss through old age. 
But the revered Ratthapala is still young, endowed with the coal- 
black hair of radiant youth, in his early prime, and there is none of 
this loss through old age for the revered Ratthapala. What has the 
good Ratthapala known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from 
home into homelessness ? 

And what, good Ratthapala, is loss through illness ? As to this, 
good Ratthapala, someone is iB, in pain, grievously iU. He reflects 
thus : * I am now ill, in pain, grievously iU, so it is not easy for me to 
acquire wealth not already acquired or to use to advantage the 
wealth already acquired. [67] Suppose . . . (os above ) . . / So he that 
is foBowed by this loss through illness . . . goes forth from home into 
homelessness. Good Ratthapala, this is caBed loss through illness. 
But the revered Ratthapala is still free from illness, not ailing, 
possessed of a good digestion that is neither too cold nor too hot, 
and there is none of this loss through iBness for the revered Rattha- 
pala. What has the good Ratthapala known or seen or heard that he 
has gone forth from home into homelessness ? 

And what, good Ratthapala, is loss of wealth ? As to this, good 

ifc must be noticed that at Vin . i. 192, D. i, 7, A. i. 181 it h n r sequence with 
assatthara rathatlhara , horse-rug, chariot-rug, and therefore apr>ears to be 
elephant-rug. MA. iii. 305 says that a thin 11 elephant-rug ” filled with 
flowers (? bahalapuppho) having been folded double, is spread and indicated 
{abhilakkhita, distinguished) for it would not be suitable to sit on it uninvited. 



II. 67-68 With Ratthapala 261 

Ratthapala, someone is rich, of great possessions, very wealthy, but 
gradually these riches of his diminish. He reflects thus: * Formerly 
I was rich, of great possessions, very wealthy, but gradually these 
riches of mine have diminished, so it is not easy for me to acquire 
wealth ... (as above) . . .* So he that is followed by this loss of 
wealth . . . goes forth from home into homelessness. Good Rattha- 
pala, this is called loss of wealth. But the revered Ratthapala is the 
son of a leading family in this very Thullakotthita, and there is none 
of this loss of wealth for the revered Ratthapala. What has the good 
Ratthapala known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from home 
into homelessness ? 

And what, good Ratthapala, is loss of relations ? As to this, good 
Ratthapala, someone has many friends and acquaintances, kith 
and kin, but gradually these relations of his diminish. He reflects 
thus : 4 Formerly I had many friends and acquaintances, kith and 
kin, but gradually these relations of mine have diminished, so it is 
not easy for me to acquire wealth . . . (os above) . . / [68] So he that 

is followed by this loss of relations, having cut off hair and beard, 
having donned saffron garments, goes forth from home into homeless- 
ness. Good Ratthapala, this is called loss of relations. But the 
revered Ratthapala has many friends and acquaintances, kith and 
kin, in this very Thullakotthita, and there is none of this loss of 
relations for the revered Ratthapala. What has the good Rattha- 
pala known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from home into 
homelessness ? 

These, good Ratthapala, are the four kinds of loss followed by which 
some (men) here, having cut off hair and beard, having donned saffron 
garments, go forth from home into homelessness. But there are none 
of these for the revered Ratthapala. What has the good Ratthapala 
known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from home into 
homelessness V 9 

“ There are, sire, four expoundings of dhamma expounded by the 
Lord who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One ; 
because I have known and seen and heard these I have gone forth 
from home into homelessness. What are the four ? The first 
expounding of dhamma expounded by the Lord . . . fully Self- 
Awakened One is that: 4 The instable world is brought to an end.’ 1 
Because I have known and seen and heard this I have gone forth 


1 Upamyati loko addhuvo . On upaniyati, to be led, driven, to be carried 
on or away, see K.S. i. 4, n. 1. 



262 


II. 68-69 


from home into homelessness. The second expounding of dhamma 
expounded by the Lord . . . fully Self- Awakened One is that: 4 The 
world is no refuge, no guard * . . . The third expounding of dhamma 
expounded by the Lord . . . fully Self- Awakened One is that: 4 The 
world is not one's own, one must go leaving everything.’ . . . The 
fourth expounding of dhamma expounded by the Lord who knows, 
who sees, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One is that: 4 The 
world lacks and is unsatisfied, a slave to craving.’ Because I have 
known and seen and heard this I have gone forth from home into 
homelessness. These, sire, are the four expoundings of dhamma 
expounded by the Lord who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully 
[69] Self- Awakened One; because I have known and seen and heard 
these I have gone forth from home into homelessness.” 

44 The good Ratthapala says : 4 The instable world is brought to an 
end.’ But how is the meaning of this saying to be understood, good 
Ratthapala ?” 

44 What do you think about this, sire ? Were you, at the age of 
twenty or twenty-five, expert in (handling) an elephant and a horse 
and a chariot and a bow and a sword, strong of leg and arm, able 1 
and proficient in warfare ?” 

44 1, good Rafthapala, at the age of twenty or twenty-five, was 
expert in (handling) an elephant and a horse and a chariot and a 
bow and a sword, I was strong of leg and arm, able and proficient 
in warfare; methinks I was sometimes inspired; I saw none equal to 
myself in strength.” 

44 What do you think about this, sire ? Are you still so strong in 
leg and arm, able and proficient in warfare ?” 

44 No, good Ra^thapala, I am now worn, old, full of years, I have 
lived my span and am at the close of my life — round eighty years of 
age. Sometimes, good Rafthapala, when I want to take a step in 
one direction I step in another.” 2 

44 It was in reference to this, sire, that the Lord who knows, who 
sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, said: 4 The instable 

1 Reading alamatto with the text, other versions and MA. iii. 307 against 
one tentative v.l. and PED. which read, as in other contexts, cUamattho . 
The meaning in each case however seems to be samatiho (as also at DA. 660), 
to which at MA. iii. 307 is added attabhavo , the individual. Samattha-atUi- 
bhava would therefore mean: “the individual is sufficient unto himself,’* 
self-reliant, self-sufficient, which also could be taken as a meaning of alam-aUa, 
“ self is enough.” 

1 Cf. DhA. i. 7 mahallakassa . . . hatihapddd anasmva honti , an old man’s 
arms and legs are disobedient. 




II. 69-70 With Ratthapala 263 

world is brought to an end/ Because I have known and seen and 
heard this I have gone forth from home into homelessness.” 

44 It is wonderful, good Ratthapala, it is marvellous, good Rattha- 
pala, that this was so well spoken by the Lord who knows, who sees, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, that: 4 The instable world is 
brought to an end/ For, good Ratthapala, the instable world is 
brought to an end. Now, good Ratthapala, in this royal family are 
squadrons of elephants and squadrons of horses and squadrons of 
chariots and squadrons of infantry which, if we were in distress, [70] 
would defend us. 1 The good Ratthapala says: ‘The world is no 
refuge, no guard/ But how is the meaning of this saying to be 
understood, good Ratthapala V 9 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? Have you any chronic 
illness V 9 

“ I have a chronic illness of wind, good Ratthapala. Sometimes 
friends and acquaintances, kith and kin stand round me, saying: 
4 Now the Kuru king will pass away, now the Kuru king will pass 
away/ ” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? Would you be able to say 
to friends and acquaintances, kith and kin : 4 Let the good friends and 
acquaintances, kith and kin, ease my pain, let them all share this 
feeling so that I could experience a more buoyant feeling V Or do 
you have to experience that feeling alone V 9 

44 1, good Ratthapala, am not able to say to friends and acquain- 
tances, kith and kin: ... (as above) ... So I have to experience that 
feeling alone.” 

44 It was in reference to this, sire, that the Lord who knows, who 
sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, said: 4 The world is no 
refuge, no guard/ Because I have known and seen and heard this, I 
have gone forth from home into homelessness.” 

44 It is wonderful, good Ratthapala, it is marvellous, good Rattha- 
pala, that this was so well spoken by the Lord who knows, who sees, 
perfected one, fully Self- A wakened One, that: 4 The world is no 
refuge, no guard/ For, good Ratthapala, the world is no refuge, no 
guard. Now, Ratthapala, in this royal family is an abundance of 
gold coins and gold, both in the ground and above it. 2 The good 

1 pariyodhaya vattissanti . Cf. S. i. 72-73 where the Buddhist view is 
given: that however many squadrons might guard ( rakkhanti ) a person, yet 
attd (self) is not guarded by them, tesam arakkhito attd; for theirs is merely 
an outer guard, not an inner. 

* vehdsattha (with v.l. vehasagcUa ) as at Vin . iii. 48. See B.D. i. p. 79, n. 6 
for further references. 



264 


II. 70-71 


82. Ratthapalasuita 

Ratthapala says: ‘ The world is not one’s own, one must go leaving 
everything.’ But how is the meaning of this saying to be understood, 
good Ratthapala 1” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? Although you at present 
[71] divert yourself endowed with and possessed of the five strands 
of sense-pleasures, will you hereafter be able to say: ‘ Even so am I 
diverting myself endowed with and possessed of these same five 
strands of sense-pleasures V Or will others come into this wealth 
while you go on according to kamma V ’ 

“ Although I at present, dear Ratthapala, divert myself ... I will 
not hereafter be able to say: * Even so am I diverting myself endowed 
with and possessed of these same five strands of sense-pleasures.’ 
So others will come into this wealth while I go on according to 
kamma” 

“ It was in reference to this, sire, that the Lord who knows, who 
sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, said : 4 The world is not 
one’s own, one must go leaving everything.’ Because I have known 
and seen and heard this, I have gone forth from home into homeless- 
ness.” 

“ It is wonderful, good Ratthapala, it is marvellous, good Rattha- 
pala, that this was so well spoken by the Lord who knows, who sees, 
perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, that: ‘The world is not 
one’s own, one must go leaving everything.’ For, good Ratthapala, 
the world is not one’s own, one must go leaving everything. Now, 
the good Ratthapala says: ‘ The world lacks and is unsatisfied, a 
slave to craving.’ But how is the meaning of this saying to be 
understood, good Ratthapala ?” 

“ What do you think about this, sire % Is the Kuru you dwell in 
as master, 1 prosperous ?” 

“ Yes, good Ratthapala, the Kuru I dwell in as master is pros- 
perous.” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? If a trustworthy, reliable 
man were to come to you here from the east and having approached 
you should say: 1 If it please you, sire, you should know that I am 
coming from the east, and have seen a great country there, rich, 
prosperous, thronged with people; there were many squadrons of 
elephants there, squadrons of horses, squadrons of chariots, squadrons 
of infantry; there is much ivory there, much gold both unwrought 


1 ajjhavasaiu Cf. Ja . vi. 273, where koravya is explained as Kururattha- 
yasika, a dweller in the Kuru kingdom. 



II. 71-73 With Ratthapala 265 

and wrought, many women are there. And it is possible to conquer 
it with such and such a force. Conquer it, sire.* What would you 

do r 

[72] “ When I had conquered it, good Ratthapala, I should dwell 
in it as master.” 

4 4 What do you think about this, sire ? If a trustworthy, reliable 
man were to come to you here from the west ... the north ... the 
south, and having approached you, should say: . . . (as above , reading 
west, north, south, for east) . . . What would you do ?” 

“ When I had conquered it, good Ratthapala, I should dwell in it 
as master.” 

“ It was in reference to this, sire, that the Lord who knows, who 
sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, said : * The world lacks 
and is unsatisfied, a slave to craving.’ Because I have known and 
seen and heard this, I have gone forth from home into homeless- 
ness.” 

“ It is wonderful, good Ratthapala, it is marvellous, good Rattha- 
pala, that this was so well spoken by the Lord who knows, who sees, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, that: 4 The world lacks and 
is unsatisfied, a slave to craving/ For, good Ratthapala, the world 
lacks, it is unsatisfied, it is a slave to craving.” 

The venerable Ratthapala said this; having said this, he further 
spoke thus: 1 

“ I see men of wealth in the world — 
acquiring property, from delusion they give not away; 
out of greed a hoard of wealth they make, 
and hanker sorely after more sense-pleasures. 

A king, having forcibly conquered the earth, 
inhabiting a land with the ocean its confines, 
not satisfied with this side of the sea 
hankers after the sea’s further side too. 

[73] Kings and full many another man 
come to their dying their cravings not gone; 


1 In the following unraetrieal rendering, I have attempted to be more 
exactly literal than either Mrs. Rhys Davids or Lord Chalmers. Otherwise 
I would have followed one or other of thes<s beautiful versions, the former 
to be found in Pss. Breth „ and the latter in Fur. Dial . ii., and both of which 
I have found very helpful. 



266 


II. 73 


82. RaUhapdlasutta 

as those that still lack they put off the body; 
yet in the world is no satisfaction in sense-pleasures. 1 

Letting down their hair, kinsmen bewail him 
and say: ‘ Alas, he is not undying.’ 

Bearing him wrapped in a shroud, 
kindling a pyre, they cremate him then. 

Being prodded by stakes, he bums 
in the one garment, riches got rid of. 

Not to one who is dying are kinsfolk a refuge 
any more than are friends or intimates here. 

Heirs carry off his wealth ; 

but the being goes on according to kamma . 

Wealth does not follow him who is dying, 
nor child or wife, nor wealth or kingdom. 

Long life is not gained from wealth, 
nor is old age banished by property. 

‘ For brief is this life,’ the wise say, 
non-eternal, subject to change. 

Rich and poor feel the touch, 2 
fool and wise are touched alike. 

But the fool, as though struck down by folly, prostrate lies, 
while the wise, touched by the touch, trembles not. 

Wherefore better than wealth is wisdom 
by which one here secures accomplishment. 3 
Not being accomplished in this- becoming or that, 4 
they do evil deeds from delusion. 


1 Meaning, I think, that they cannot be satiated. 

* phumnti phassam , t.e. they touch the touch, namely of dying, mar arm- 
phassa , MA. iii. 308. 

* /.«. arahantship. 

4 bhavabhave.su, explained at MA. iii. 308 as 44 in low and excellent be- 
comings,” and at ThagA . as mahanidmantesu bhavesu . Bhavabhava also 
occurs at Sn. 1060, 1068; and at ThigA . 71, samsaranto bhavdbhave; it means 
in the various becomings. Cf. phaldphala, a variety, or all kinds, of fruit. 



II. 73-74 With Ratthapdla 267 

He comes to a womb and to another world, 
being bound to samsdra , l in a successive (round) ; 
one of little wisdom, having faith in him, 
comes to a womb and to another world, 

[74] As a thief of evil nature, caught in the act 
of breaking in, is ruined 2 by his own kamma , 
so the race, of evil nature, is hereafter, 
in another world, ruined by its own kamma . 

Divers sweet, delightful sense-pleasures 
in various ways disturb the mind; 
having seen the peril in sense-pleasures, 

I, 0 sire, have therefore gone forth. 

As fruits from the tree, so fall men, 

both young and old, on the break up of the body. 

Having seen 3 this too, I have gone forth, sire. 

Better indeed is sure recluseship.” 

Discourse with Ratthapala: 

The Second 


83. DISCOURSE ON MAKHADEVA 4 

(Makhadevasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Mithila 
in Makhadeva’s Mango Grove, 5 Then the Lord smiled (when he 

1 samsdram apajja , undergoes, experiences, produces samsdra. Cf . S. i. 
37, 38, saito samsdram apadu 

* hanhati , is struck, hit, killed, destroyed. 

* In answer to the king’s questions, put in the narrative part of this 
Discourse, Ratthapala now tells him what he has seen and heard to make him 
go forth. 

4 Cf. Makhademjataka, No. 9, and Nimijdtaka , No. 541. 

* This Grove was originally planted by Makhadeva, and although other 
kings replaced trees that had died, the Grove was known by its early name, 
MA. iii. 309. 



268 


II. 74-75 


83. Makhadevasutta 

came to a) certain place. Then it occurred to the venerable Ananda : 
“ What is the cause, what the reason that the Lord is smiling ? Not 
without motive do Tathagatas smile.” Then the venerable Ananda, 
having arranged his robe over one shoulder, having saluted the Lord 
with joined palms, spoke thus to the Lord: “ Now, revered sir, what 
is the cause, what the reason that the Lord is smiling ? Not without 
motive do Tathagatas smile.” 1 

“ Once upon a time, Ananda, in this very Mithila there was a king 
named Makhadeva, a dhamma- man, a king under dhamma , firm in 
dhamma , a great king who fared by dhamma among brahmans and 
householders, townsfolk and countryfolk, and who observed the 
Observance on the fourteenth, [75] fifteenth and eighth days of the 
half-month. 2 Then, Ananda, at the end of many years, many 
hundreds of years, many thousands of years, King Makhadeva 
addressed his barber, saying: ‘ When, good barber, you see grey hairs 
growing on my head, then you may tell me/ Ananda, the barber 
answered King Makhadeva in assent, saying, ‘ Yes, sire.’ Then, 
Ananda, at the end of many years, many hundreds of years, many 
thousands of years, the barber saw grey hairs growing on King 
Makhadeva’s head. Seeing that, Ananda, he spoke thus to King 
Makhadeva: ‘Death’s messengers 3 have appeared to his majesty; 
grey hairs are to be seen growing on his head.’ 

‘ Well then, good barber, when you have pulled out those grey 
hairs properly with the tweezers, place them on my fingers.’ 

‘ Yes, your majesty.’ And when, Ananda, the barber had 
answered King Makhadeva in assent, he pulled out the grey hairs 
properly with the tweezers and placed them on King Makhadeva’s 
fingers. And, Ananda, King Makhadeva, having given the boon of 
a village to the barber, had the prince who was his eldest son sum- 
moned and spoke thus : 

‘Dear Prince, Death’s messengers have appeared to me; grey 
hairs are to be seen growing on my head. Human sense-pleasures 

1 CJ . M . Sta. 81. 

1 At Fin. i. 101 it is recorded that wanderers belonging to other sects 
gathered together on these days so as to speak dhamma . Buddhist monks 
were then allowed (by the Lord) to do the same, and a new ruling was sub- 
sequently introduced allowing them to recite the Patimokkha, or Observance 
(recently devised by the Teacher) once in every half-month. Vin. i. 104. 
(See B.Z). iv. 130 ff.). 

* devaduta . MA . iii. 310 says “ the deva is death (maccu); his messengers 
are devaduta .” Cf. Devaduta- Sutta, M. Sta. No. 130; and Devadutavagga at 
A. i. 132 ff. 



II. 75-78 


On Makhadeva 


269 


have been enjoyed by me; it is now time to seek deva- like sense- 
pleasures. Come you, dear Prince, rule this kingdom. For I, 
having cut off my hair and beard, having donned saffron garments, 
will go forth from home into homelessness. And now, dear Prince, 
when you too see grey hairs growing on your head, then, having 
given the boon of a village to the barber, having handed over the 
kingdom properly to the prince who is your eldest son, having cut off 
your hair and beard, having donned saffron garments, you should go 
forth from home into homelessness. This lovely custom founded by 
me you should maintain ; do not you be the last man after me. Dear 
Prince, while two persons exist and there is a breaking of such a 
lovely custom, whichever of these (breaks it) he is the last man. 1 
So I, dear Prince, speak thus to you : This lovely [76] custom founded 
by me you should maintain; do not you be the last man after me/ 

Then, Ananda, King Makhadeva, having given the boon of the 
village to the barber, having handed over the kingdom properly to 
the prince who was his eldest son, having in this very Makhadeva 
Mango Grove cut off his hair and beard, having donned saffron 
garments, went forth from home into homelessness. He dwelt, 
having suffused the first quarter with a mind of friendliness, likewise 
the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; just so above, 
below, across; he dwelt having suffused the whole world everywhere, 
in every way, with a mind of friendliness that was far-reaching, 
wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence. 
He dwelt having suffused the first quarter with a mind of compassion 
. . . sympathetic joy . . . equanimity . . . that was far-reaching, wide- 
spread, immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence. But, 
Ananda, King Makhadeva had played at boys’ sports 2 for 84,000 
years, had ruled as a viceroy 3 for 84,000 years, and had ruled as a 
king for 84,000 years; for 84,000 years, gone forth from home into 
homelessness in this very Makhadeva Mango Grove, he fared the 
Brahma-faring. He, having developed the four Brakma-abidings, 
was one who at the breaking up of the body after dying reached the 

Brahma-world. 

And, Ananda, at the end of many years, many hundreds of years, 
many thousands of years, King Makliadeva’s son addressed his 
barber . . . (as above , reading King Makhadeva’s son throughout) . . . 
[77] . . . [78] He, having developed the four Brahma-abidings, was 

1 Chalmers has “ he who breaks it is the last of the line.” 

* C/. with Mahasudassana at D. ii. 196. 

3 See .4. iii. 154 on making vice -royalty one’s aim. 



270 33. Makhadevasutta II. 78-79 

one who at the oreakmg up of the body after dying reached the 
Brahma-world. 

And then, Ananda, King Makhadeva’s sons’ descendants who 
succeeded him, after 84,000 years as nobles, having in this very 
Makhadeva Mango Grove cut off their hair and beards, having 
donned saffron garments, went forth from home into homelessness. 
These dwelt having suffused the first quarter with a mind of friend- 
liness . . . These, having developed the four Brahma-abidings, were 
those who at the breaking up of the body after dying reached the 
Brahma-world. 

Nimi was the last of these kings, a Mamma-man, a king under 
Mamma , firm in Mamma, a great king who fared by Mamma among 
brahmans and householders, townsfolk and countryfolk, and who 
observed the Observance on the fourteenth, fifteenth and eighth days 
of the half-month. 

Once upon a time, Ananda, when the Devas of the Thirty-Three 
[79] were sitting down gathered together in the Sudhamma debating 
hall, this chance talk arose: * Indeed it is a gain for the Videhas, 1 
indeed it is well gotten by the Videhas in that their king Nimi is a 
Mamma-man , a king under Mamma , firm in Mamma, a great king 
who fares by Mamma among brahmans and householders, townsfolk 
and countryfolk, and who observes the Observance on the fourteenth, 
fifteenth and eighth days of the half-month.’ 

Then, Ananda, Sakka, the lord of devas , addressed the Devas 
of the Thirty-Three: saying; ‘ Do you, good sirs, want to see King 
Nimi V 

1 We, good sir, want to see King Nimi.’ 

At that time King Nimi, keeping an Observance day, having 
washed his head on that Observance day — a fifteenth day — was 
sitting down on an upper terrace of his palace. Then, Ananda, as 
a strong man might stretch out his bent arm or might bend back his 
outstretched arm, so did Sakka, the lord of devas, disappearing from 
the Devas of the Thirty-Three, appear before King Nimi. Then, 
Ananda, Sakka, the lord of devas, spoke thus to King Nimi: ‘ It is 
a gain for you, sire, it is well gotten by you, sire. Sire, the Devas of 
the Thirty-Three are sitting down in the Sudhamma debating hall, 
praising you and saying: Indeed it is a gain for the Videhas ... (as 
above) ... of the half-month. Sire, the Devas of the Thirty-Three 
are anxious to see you, so I, sire, will send you a chariot harnessed 


1 Mithila was the capital of Videha. 



II, 79-80 On Makhadeva 271 

with a thousand thoroughbreds ; sire, you should mount the cfew-like 
vehicle without hesitation. 1 

Ananda, King Nimi consented by becoming silent. Then, Ananda, 
Sakka, the lord of devas , summoned the charioteer Matali and said: 
4 Come you, good Matali, having harnessed a chariot with a thousand 
thoroughbreds, and having approached King Nimi, speak thus: 
44 This chariot, harnessed with a thousand thoroughbreds, has been 
sent to you by Sakka, the lord of devas . Sire, you should mount the 
deva-Hke [80] vehicle without hesitation.” * 

4 So be it, your honour/ And, Ananda, Matali the charioteer, 
having answered Sakka, the lord of devas , in assent, having harnessed 
a chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds and having approached 
Kong Nimi, spoke thus: ‘This chariot, sire, harnessed with a 
thousand thoroughbreds, has been sent to you by Sakka, the lord of 
devas ; sire, you should mount the deva-iike vehicle without hesitation. 
And, moreover, sire, by which (route) do I conduct you 1 — that by 
which evil deeds undergo the ripening of evil deeds or that by which 
lovely deeds undergo the ripening of lovely deeds 2 * V 

* Conduct me by both, Matali/ So, Ananda, the charioteer 
Matali brought King Nimi to the Sudhamma debating hall. And, 
Ananda, Sakka, the lord of devas , saw King Nimi approaching from 
the distance; seeing him, he spoke to King Nimi: 4 Come, sire, you 
are welcome, sire. Sire, the Devas of the Thirty-Three are sitting 
down in the Sudhamma debating hall praising you, and saying: 
Indeed it is a gain for the Videhas . . . (as above ) ... of the half-month. 
Sire, the Devas of the Thirty-Three are anxious to see you. Rejoice, 
sire, among the Devas with a deva’s majesty/ 

4 Enough, good sir; let me return to Mithila itself where I will fare 
by dhamma among brahmans and householders, townsfolk and 
countryfolk and will observe the Observance on the fourteenth, 
fifteenth and eighth days of the half-month/ 

Then, Ananda, Sakka, the lord of devas , summoned the charioteer 
Matali and said : 1 Come you, good Matali, having harnessed a chariot 

with a thousand thoroughbreds, take King Nimi back to Mithila itself. ’ 


1 kaiamena iam nemi. In the Nimijdtaka ( Jd . vi, 104), where the whole 
episode is given in much greater detail, the reading is kena tatn nemi maggena. 

For the one road goes to Niraya Hell and the other to a dem- world. 

8 Perhaps “ doers of evil deeds and doers of lovely deeds '* should bo 
understood. In spite of Bu.’s verse in Vtim. that the deed exists but not the 
doer of it, at MA . iii. 316 he says pdpakammantd pdpakanam kammdnam ripd- 

kam papisamvediyanti , “ doers of evil undergo the ripening of evil deeds.” 



272 83. Mdkhademsutta II. 80-83 

4 So be it, your honour.* 1 And, Ananda, Matali the charioteer, 
having answered Sakka, the lord of dews , in assent, harnessed a 
chariot with a thousand thoroughbreds and took King Nimi back 
to Mithila itself. While he was there, Ananda, Bang Nimi fared 
by dhamma among brahmans and householders, townsfolk and 
countryfolk, and [ 81 ] he observed the Observance on the fourteenth, 
fifteenth and eighth days of the half-month. Then, Ananda, at the 
end of many years, many hundreds of years, many thousands of 
years, King Nimi addressed his barber, saying: . . ♦ (as above, reading 
King Nimi) . , . [ 82 ] . . . He, having developed the four Brahma- 
abidings, was one who at the breaking up of the body after dying 
reached the Brahma-world. 

But, Ananda, King Nimi’s son was called Kalarajanaka. He did 
not go forth from home into homelessness. He broke that lovely 
custom; of those (who observed it) he was the last man. It may be 
that this occurs to you, Ananda: ‘ At that time King Makhadeva by 
whom that lovely custom was founded was someone else.* But this, 
Ananda, must not be understood thus. I, at that time, was King 
Makhadeva; I founded that lovely custom; the folk that came after 
maintained that lovely custom founded by me. But that lovely 
custom, Ananda, did not conduce to turning away from, nor to 
dispassion, stopping, tranquillity, super-knowledge, self-awakening 
or nibbana — only to reaching the Brahma-world. But this lovely 
custom founded by me now, Ananda, conduces to absolute turning 
away from, to dispassion, stopping, tranquillity, super-knowledge, 
self-awakening and nibbana. And what, Ananda, is the lovely 
custom founded by me now that conduces to absolute turning away 
from . . . nibbana % It is this ariyan eightfold Way itself, that is to 
say, perfect view, perfect thought, perfect speech, perfect action, 
perfect mode of livelihood, [88] perfect endeavour, perfect mind- 
fulness, perfect concentration. It is this lovely custom founded by 
me now, Ananda, that conduces to absolute turning away from . . . 
nibbana. I, Ananda, speak about it thus: This lovely custom 
founded by me you should maintain; do not you be the last man 
after me. Ananda, while two persons exist and there is a breaking 
of such a lovely custom, whichever one of these (breaks it), he is the 
last man. In regard to this, I, Ananda, speak to you thus: This 
lovely custom founded by me you should maintain ; do not you be the 
last man after me.** 

1 Here: evarh bhaddan tarn; above evarh hotu bhaddan tarn, MA. iii. 314 
says: evarh hotu bhaddakan lava vacanan ti vatvd. 



II. 83-84 


On Makhadeva 


273 


Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, the venerable Ananda rejoiced 
in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on Makhadeva: 

The Third 


84. DISCOURSE AT MADHURA 
(Madhurasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the venerable Kaccana the Great 
was staying near Madhura in the Gunda Grove. 1 Avantiputta, 2 
king of Madhura, heard that the recluse Kaccana was staying near 
Madhura in the Gunda Grove and that of that revered Kaccana a 
lovely report had gone forth thus : * He is clever, experienced, wise, 
one who has heard much, a brilliant speaker, of lovely intelligence, 
senior as well as being a perfected one. Good is the sight of perfected 
ones like this/ Then Avantiputta, king of Madhura, having had 
many splendid vehicles harnessed, having mounted a splendid vehicle, 
set out from Madhura with the many splendid vehicles and with great 
royal pomp so as to see the venerable Kaccana the Great. He went 
by vehicle as long as the ground was passable, then, having dis- 
mounted from the vehicle, he approached the venerable Kaccana 
the Great on foot; having approached, [84] he exchanged greetings 
with the venerable Kaccana the Great; and having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, Avantiputta, king of 
Madhura, spoke thus to the venerable Kaccana the Great: 

“ Good Kaccana, brahmans speak thus : ‘ Only brahmans form the 
best caste, all other castes are low;. only brahmans form the fair 

caste, all other castes are dark; only brahmans are pure, not non- 
brahmans; brahmans are own sons of Brahma, born of his mouth, 
born of Brahma, formed by Brahma, heirs to Brahma.’ 3 What does 
the revered Kaccana say to this ?” 

“ Sire, this is merely a sound in the world, that ‘ Only brahmans 

1 As at A. i. 67. This Madhura is on the Jumna. 

* MA. iii. 319: the son of the daughter of the king of Avanti, 

3 As at M. ii. 148; D, iii. 81. 



274 


84. Madhurasutta 


11. 84-85 


form the best caste . . heirs to Brahma/ This is a way in which it 
can be said, sire, that this is merely a sound in the world, that 4 Only 
brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to Brahma/ What do you 
think about this, sire ? Even if a noble were to thrive in wealth or 
corn or gold or silver, could he have as his obedient servant another 
noble to get up earlier than he would, to go later to rest, carrying out 
his pleasure, speaking affably, 1 or could he have a brahman or could 
he have a merchant or could he have a worker to get up earlier than 
he would, to go later to rest, carrying out his pleasure, speaking 
affably ?” 

4 4 Good Kaccana, if a noble were to thrive in wealth or corn or 
gold or silver he could have as his obedient servant a nable ... a 
brahman ... a merchant ... a worker to get up earlier than he 
would, to go later to rest, carrying out his pleasure, speaking affably/’ 

44 What do you think about this, sire ? If a brahman were to 
thrive in wealth . . . could he have another brahman ... or a merchant 
or could he have a worker [85] or could he have a noble . . . speaking 
affably t” 

44 Good Kaccana, if a brahman were to thrive ... he could have as 
his obedient servant a brahman ... a merchant ... a worker ... a 
noble to get up earlier than he would . . /’ 

4 4 What do you think about this, sire ? If a merchant were to 
thrive in wealth . . . could he have another merchant ... or a worker 
or could he have a noble or could he have a brahman . . . speaking 
affably ?” 

44 Good Kaccana, if a merchant were to thrive ... he could have as 
his obedient servant a merchant ... a worker ... a noble ... a 
brahman . . . speaking affably/’ 

44 What do you think about this, sire ? If a worker were to tlirive 
in wealth . . . could he have another worker ... or a noble or could 
he have a brahman or could he have a merchant . . . speaking 
affably 9” 

44 Good Kaccana, if a worker were to thrive in wealth or corn or 
gold or silver, he could have as his obedient servant another worker 
to get up earlier than he would, to go later to rest, carrying out his 
pleasure, speaking affably; and he could have a noble and he could 
have a brahman and he could have a merchant as his obedient servant, 
to get up earlier than he would, to go later to rest, carrying out his 
pleasure, speaking affably,” 


1 Cf. 2). i. 60; A . iii. 37. 



II. 85-87 


At Madhura 


275 


“ What do you think about this, sire ? This being so, are these 
four castes exactly the same or not ? Or how does this seem to you f” 

[86] “ Indeed, good Kaccana, this being so, these four castes are 
exactly the same; I do not see any difference between them in this 
respect.” 

“ This is a way in which it can be said, sire, that this is merely a 
sound in the world, that * Only brahmans form the best caste . . . 
heirs to Brahma/ What do you think about this, sire ? If a noble 
made onslaught on creatures here, took what had not been given, 
wrongly enjoyed pleasures of the senses, were a liar, of slanderous 
speech, of harsh speech, a gossip, covetous, malevolent in mind, of 
wrong view — would he at the breaking up of the body after dying 
arise in the sorrowful way, the bad bourn, the Downfall, Niraya 
Hell ? Or not ? Or how does this seem to you ?” 

“ If a noble, good Kaccana, made onslaught on creatures, took 
what had not been given ... at the breaking up of the body after 
dying he would arise in . . , Niraya Hell. This is how it seems to me, 
and thus have I heard it from perfected ones.” 

“ It is good, it is good, sire; it is good that it seems thus to you, 
sire, and it is good that you have heard this from perfected ones. 
What do you think about this, sire ? If a brahman, if a merchant, 
if a worker made onslaught on creatures here ... at the breaking up 
of the body after dying would he arise in . . . Niraya Hell ? Or not ? 
Or how does this seem to you ?” 

“ If (a brahman, a merchant), a worker, good Kaccana, made 
onslaught on creatures ... at the breaking up of the body after dying 
lie would arise in . . . Niraya Hell. [This is how it seems to me] 1 and 
thus have I heard it from perfected ones.” 

“ It is good, it is good, sire; it is good that it seems thus to you, 
sire, and it is good that you have heard this from perfected ones. 
What do you think about this, sire ? This being so, are these four 
castes exactly the same or not ? Or how does this seem to you ?” 

[87] “ Indeed, good Kaccana, this being so, these four castes are 
exactly the same; I do not see any difference between them in this 
respect.” 

“ This is a way in which it can be said, sire, that this is only a 
sound in *the world, that 4 Only brahmans form the best caste . . . 
heirs to Brahma/ What do you think about this, sire ? If a noble 
refrained from onslaught on creatures here, from taking what had 


1 Omitted in the text, in error judging from the king’s response. 



276 


84. Madkurasutta 


II. 87-88 


not been given, from wrong enjoyment of the sense-pleasures, from 
being a liar, from slanderous speech, from harsh speech, from being 
a gossip, were not covetous, were benevolent in mind and of right 
view — would he at the breaking up of the body after dying arise in a 
good bourn, a heaven world ? Or not ? Or how does this seem to 
you V f 

“ If a noble, good Kaccana, refrained from onslaught of creatures 
. , , at the breaking up of the body after dying he would arise in a 
good bourn, a heaven world. This is how it seems to me, and thus 
have I heard it from perfected ones.” 

" It is good, it is good, sire ; it is good that it seems thus to you, 
sire, and it is good that you have heard this from perfected ones. 
What do you think about this, sire ? If a brahman, if a merchant, 
if a worker refrained from onslaught on creatures here . . . would he 
at the breaking up of the body after dying arise in a good bourn, a 
heaven world ? Or not ? Or how does it seem to you ?” 

“ If (a brahman, a merchant), a worker, good Kaccana, refrained 
from onslaught on creatures ... at the breaking up of the body after 
dying he would arise in a good bourn, a heaven world. This is how 
it seems to me, and thus have I heard it from perfected ones.” 

“ It is good, it is good, sire ; it is good that it seems thus to you, 
sire, and it is good that you have heard this from perfected ones. 
What do you think about this, sire 1 This being so, are these four 
castes exactly the same or not ? Or how does this seem to you V 9 

[88] “ Indeed, good Kaccana, this being so, these four castes are 
exactly the same; I do not see any difference between them in this 
respect.” 

“ This is a way in which it can be said, sire, that this is merely a 
sound in the world, that 1 Only brahmans form the best caste . , . 
heirs to Brahma/ What do you think about this, sire ? If a 
noble were to break into a house, or carry off loot, or commit a 
robbery, or make an ambush, or commit adultery, 1 and if men who 
had captured him were to show him to you, and say: 1 This, your 
majesty, is the thief who is doing evil to you, decree what punish- 
ment you like for him ’ — what would you do to him V y 

“ Good Kaccana, we should kill him or ruin him or banish him 
or deal with him as we liked. 3 What is the cause of this i Good 
Kaccana, the designation of * noble * that he once had has now 
disappeared for him, and he is reckoned simply as ‘ thief.’ ” 


1 As at AT. i. 87. 


Various punishments are named at J/. i. 87, 



II. 88-89 


At Madhurd 


277 


“ What do you think about this, sire ? If (a brahman, a merchant), 
a worker were to break into a house . . . what would you do to him ?” 

“ Good Kaccana, we should kill him ... he is reckoned simply as 
‘thief.’” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? This being so, are these 
four castes exactly the same or not ? Or how does this seem to 
you ?” 

“ Indeed, good Kaccana, this being so, these four castes are exactly 
the same; I do not see any difference between them in this respect.” 

“ This is a way in which it can be said, sire, that this is merely a 
sound in the world, that * Only brahmans form the best caste [ 89 ] 
. . . heirs to Brahma.’ What do you think about this, sire ? If a 
noble, having cut off his hair and beard here, 1 having donned saffron 
robes, should have gone forth from home into homelessness, and is 
one that refrains from onslaught on creatures, from taking what has 
not been given, from lying speech, is a one-meal-man, a Brahma- 
farer, virtuous, of lovely character — what would you do to him ?” 

“ Good Kaccana, we should salute him or rise up before him or 
offer him a seat or invite him to the requisites of robe-material, 
almsfood, lodgings and medicines for the sick, or we should have 
proper watch and ward and guard provided for him. 2 What is the 
cause of this ? Good Kaccana, the designation of ‘ noble ’ that he 
once had has now disappeared for him, and he is reckoned simply as 
‘ recluse.’ ” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? If a brahman, a merchant, 
a worker, having cut off his hair and beard here . . . what would you 
do to him ?” 

“ Good Kaccana, we should salute him . . . and he is reckoned 
simply as ‘ recluse.’ ” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? This being so, are these 
four castes exactly the same or not ? Or how does this seem to you?” 

“ Indeed, good Kaccana, this being so, these four castes are exactly 
the same ; I do not see any difference between them in this respect.” 

“ This is a way in which it can be said, sire, that this is merely a 


1 The following passage down to “ guard provided for him ” also occurs 
at M. ii. 101. 

2 Cf. D . i. 61. “ Proper ” or “ legitimate,” dhammilca , here seems to mean 

“ recognised or understood as being customary.” MA . iii. 321 says the 
arrangement would be like that (traditional one) where gatherers of sticks 
and leaves do not enter the vihara of a Naked Ascetic, or where hunters and 
trappers do not catch animals or fish within the boundary of a vihara . 



278 


84. Madhurasutta 


II. 89-90 


sound in the world, that 4 Only brahmans form the best caste, all 
other castes are low; only brahmans from the fair caste, all other 
castes are dark; only brahmans are pure, not non-brahmans; 
brahmans are own sons of Brahma, bom of his mouth, bom of 
Brahma, formed by Brahma, heirs to Brahma/ ” 

[90] When this had been said, Avantiputta, king of Madhura, spoke 
thus to the venerable Kaccana the Great: 44 Excellent, good Kaccana, 
excellent, good Kaccana. It is as if one might set upright what had 
been upset, 1 or might disclose what was covered, or show the way to 
one who had gone astray, or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so 
that those with vision might see material shapes — even so in many 
a figure has dhamma been made clear by the good Kaccana. Thus 
I am going to the revered Kaccana for refuge and to dhamma and to 
the Order of monks. May the revered Kaccana accept me as a lay- 
disciple going for refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts/* 
44 But do not you, sire, go for refuge to me. You must go for 
refuge only to that Lord to whom I have gone for refuge/’ 

44 But where, good Kaccana, is this Lord staying now, perfected 
one, fully Self- Awakened One 1” 

44 Sire, this Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, has now 
attained final nibbana/’ 

44 Good Kaccana, if we should hear that that Lord were ten . . . 
twenty . . . thirty . . . forty . . . fifty yojana distant we should go the 
fifty yojana so as to see that Lord. And, good Kaccana, even if we 
heard that the Lord were a hundred yojana distant, we should go 
the hundred yojana so as to see that Lord, perfected one, fully Self- 
Awakened One. But, good Kaccana, since the Lord has attained 
final nibbana, we are going for refuge to that Lord who has attained 
final nibbana and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the 
revered Kaccana accept me as a lay-disciple going for refuge from 
today forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse at Madhura: 

The Fourth 


1 From here to the end of this Discourse, compare with M. ii. 162-163. 



85. DISCOURSE TO PRINCE BODHI 

(Bodhirajakumarasutta) 

[91] Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying among 
the Bhaggas in Sumsumaragira in Bhesakaja Grove in the deer-park. 
At that time Prince Bodhi had a palace named Kokanada 1 ; it had not 
long been built and had had not (yet) been inhabited by a recluse or 
brahman or by any human being. Then Prince Bodhi addressed 
the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, saying: “ Come you, good San- 
jika’s son, approach the Lord; having approached, in my name 
salute the Lord’s feet with your head, and ask whether he is well, 
not indisposed, of bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort, and say: 
* Lord, Prince Bodhi salutes the Lord’s feet with his head and asks 
whether he is well . . . abiding in comfort.’ And speak thus to him: 
‘ Revered sir, may the Lord, together with the Order of monks, 
consent to (accept) a meal on the morrow with Prince Bodhi,’ ” 

“ Yes, sir,” and the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, having answered 
Prince Bodhi in assent, approached the Lord; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord, and having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the brahman youth 
Sanjika’s son spoke thus to the Lord: “ Good Gotama, Prince Bodhi 
salutes with his head the good Gotama’s feet and asks whether he is 
well . . , abiding in comfort. And he speaks thus : < May the revered 
Gotama, together with the Order of monks, consent to (accept) a 
meal on the morrow with Prince Bodhi.’ ” The Lord consented by 
becoming silent. Then the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, having 
understood the Lord’s consent, rising from his seat approached 
Prince Bodhi; having approached, he spoke thus to Prince Bodhi: 

“ I spoke in your name, good sir, to the Lord Gotama, saying: 

* Good Gotama, Prince Bodhi [92] salutes with his head the good 
Gotama’s feet and asks whether he is well , . . abiding in comfort. 
And he speaks thus: * May the good Gotama, together with the 
Order of monks, consent to (accept) a meal on the morrow with 

1 As far as p. 280 below: “ Prince Bodhi . , . sat down at a respectful 
distance,” occurs also at Vin . ii. 127 /. For notes see B.D. v. 176 ff. See 
also opening of if. Sta. No. 63. 


279 



280 


II. 92-93 


85. BodhirajakumdrasiUta 

Prince Bodhi.’ And the recluse Gotama consented.” Then, after 
Prince Bodhi had had sumptuous foods, solid and soft, prepared in 
his own dwelling towards the end of that night, and had had the 
Kokanada palace spread with white cloths as far as the last 1 flight 
of stairs, he addressed the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, saying: 
“ Come you, good Sanjika’s son, approach the Lord; having 
approached, announce the time to the Lord, saying: ‘ It is time, 
revered sir, the meal is ready/ ” 

“ Yes, good sir,” and the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, having 
answered Prince Bodhi in assent, approached the Lord; having 
approached, he announced the time to the Lord, saying: “ It is time, 
revered sir, the meal is ready.” Then the Lord, dressing in the 
morning and taking his bowl and robe, approached Prince Bodhi’s 
dwelling. At that time Prince Bodhi, while he was waiting for the 
Lord, was standing at the porch of the outside gateway. And 
Prince Bodhi saw the Lord coming in the distance; having seen him 
and gone to meet him, he greeted and honoured the Lord and 
approached the Kokanada palace. Then the Lord stood leaning 
against the last flight of stairs. And Prince Bodhi spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

" Revered sir, let the Lord step on the cloths, let the Well-farer 
step on the cloths so that for a long time it may be for my welfare 
and happiness.” When this had been said, the Lord was silent. 
And a second time . . . And a third time Prince Bodhi spoke thus to 
the Lord: “ Revered sir, let the Lord step on the cloths ... for my 
welfare and happiness.” Then the Lord looked towards the 
venerable Ananda. And the [93] venerable Ananda spoke thus to 
Prince Bodhi: 

" Prince, have the cloths packed away. The Lord will not tread 
upon a cloth carpeting; the Tathagata looks towards 2 the folk that 
come after.” 

Then Prince Bodhi had the cloths packed away, and had a seat 
made ready upstairs in the Kokanada palace. Then the Lord 
having ascended the Kokanada palace, sat down on the seat made 
ready together with the Order of monks. Then Prince Bodhi with 
his own hand served and satisfied the Order of monks with the Lord 
at its head with sumptuous foods, solid and soft. Then when the 
Lord had eaten and had withdrawn his hand from his bowl, Prince 
Bodhi, having taken a lower seat, sat down at a respectful distance. 


1 Or, western. 


* apaloketi, but Vin, ii. 128 reads anukampati. 



II. 93-94 


To Prince Bodhi 


281 


As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, Prince Bodhi Spoke 
thus to the Lord: “ Lord, it has occurred to me thus: Happiness is 
not to be achieved through happiness ; happiness is to be achieved 
through suffering.” 1 

“ To me too, Prince, before my Awakening, while I was still the 
bodhisatta , not fully awakened, it occurred : Happiness is not to be 
achieved through happiness; happiness is to be achieved through 
suffering. Then I, Prince, after a time, being young, my hair coal- 
black , . , (as in M.L.S . i, p. 207 to p. 211, reading Prince for 
monks) . . . thinking, Indeed this does well for striving. Moreover, 
Prince, three similes occurred to me ... (as in M.L.S. i, p. 295 to 
p. 303 reading Prince for Aggivessana) . . . even as I abided diligent, 
ardent, self-resolute. 2 

Then, Prince, it occurred to me: Tins dhamma , won to by me, is 
deep . . . (as in M.L.S. i, p. 211 to p. 217, reading Prince for monks) 
. . . [ 94 ] Whatever the two monks who had walked for almsfood 
brought back, that the group of six lived on. Then, Prince, the 
group of five monks, being thus exhorted, thus instructed by me, 
soon realising here and now by their own super-knowledge that 
matchless goal of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men 
of family rightly go forth from home into homelessness, entering on 
it abided in it.” 

When this had been said, Prince Bodhi spoke thus to the Lord: 
“ After how long, revered sir, does a monk taking the Tathagata as 
a leader, and having by his own super-knowledge realised here and 
now that matchless goal . . . entering on it, abide in it ?” 

“ Well then, Prince, I will ask you a question about this in return. 
As it may please you, so should you answer it. What do you think 
about this, Prince ? Are you skilled in elephant-riding, in the art 
of handling a goad ?” 

“ Yes, I, revered sir, am skilled in elephant-riding, in the art of 
handling a goad.” 

“ What do you think about this, Prince ? A man might come 
along here, and think: ‘ Prince Bodhi knows how to ride elephants 

and the art of handling the goad. I will train myself in elephant- 
riding and the art of handling the goad under him.* But had he no 
faith he could not attain whatever is to be won by faith; and had he 


» As at M. i. 93 (M.LJ3. l 123). 

2 I.e. read as far as the second occurrence of this phrase on p. 303 of vol. i. 
The sentence, “ the pleasurable feeling, arising in me, persisted without 
impinging on my mind,’* found in vol. i, does not occur in Discourse No. 85. 



282 85. Bodhirdjahumdrasutta II. 94-95 

poor health he could not attain whatever is to be won by good health ; 
and if he were fraudulent and deceitful he could not attain whatever is 
to be won by honesty and the absence of deceit; and if he were lazy 
he could not attain whatever is to be won by the output of energy; 
and if he were poor in wisdom he could not attain whatever is to be 
won by one of wisdom. What do you think about this, Prince ? 
Could that man train himself in elephant-riding and the art of 
handling the goad under you V 9 

“ Assuredly, revered sir, if that man were possessed of (such) 
qualities, he could not train himself in elephant-riding and the art 
of handling the goad under me. But who speaks of five qualities V * 

“ What do you think about this, Prince ? A man might come 
along here, and think: [95] “Prince Bodhi knows how to ride 
elephants and the art of handling the goad. I will train myself in 
elephant-riding and the art of handling the goad under him. , And 
if he had faith he could attain whatever is to be won by faith; and if 
he had good health . . . and if he were not fraudulent or deceitful . . . 
and if he had an output of energy . . . and if he were one of wisdom 
he could attain whatever is to be won by one of wisdom. What do 
you think about this, Prince ? Could that man train himself in 
elephant-riding and in the art of handling the goad under you ?” 

“ Assuredly, revered sir, if that man were possessed of (such) 
qualities, he could train himself in elephant-riding and the art of 
handling the goad under me. But who speaks of five qualities V’ 

“ Even so, Prince, are these five qualities for striving, 1 What 
five ? As to this, Prince, a monk has faith ; he has faith in the 
awakening of the Tathagata, and thinks: * Indeed this is the Lord, 
perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, endowed with knowledge 
and (right) conduct, Well-farer, knower of the worlds, incomparable 
charioteer of men to be tamed, teachers of devas and men, the 
Awakened One, the Lord.’ He is well, in good health, endowed with 
a good digestion, not over-cool, not over-hot, but of a middle kind 
suitable for striving. He is not fraudulent, not deceitful, but shows 
himself as he really is to the Teacher or the learned among his fellow 
Brahma-farers. He dwells with energy stirred up 2 for getting rid of 
unskilled states, for arousing skilled states, steadfast, firm in advance, 
persevering amid skilled states. He is one of wisdom endowed with 
wisdom 2 leading to (the cutting off of) rise and fall, with ariyan 3 


1 As at M . ii, 128; A . iii. 65; D. iii. 237. 

a MA. iii. 326 explains as “ pure,” suddha. 


* As at M . i. 356, 



II. 95-97 


To Prince Bodhi 


283 


discrimination leading to the complete destruction of anguish. 
These, Prince, are the five qualities for striving. If, Prince, a monk 
is possessed of these five qualities for striving, taking the Tathagata 
for leader, having by his own super-knowledge realised here and now 
that matchless goal of the Brahma-faring for the sake of which young 
men of family rightly go forth from home into homelessness, 
entering on it [ 98 ] he may abide in it within seven years. Let be the 
seven years, Prince. If a monk is possessed of these five qualities 
for striving ... he may abide in it in six years . . . five years, four 
years, three years, two years, one year. Let be the one year, Prince. 
If a monk is possessed of these five qualities for striving ... he may 
abide in it in seven months. Let be the seven months, Prince. If 
a monk is possessed of these five qualities for striving ... he may 
abide in it in six months . . . five months, four months, three months, 
two months, one month, half a month. Let be the half month, 
Prince, If a monk is possessed of these five qualities for striving . . . 
he may abide in it in seven days and nights. Let be the seven days 
and nights, Prince. If a monk is possessed of these five qualities for 
striving ... he may abide in it in six days and nights . . . five, four, 
three, two days and nights, one day and night. Let be the one day 
and night, Prince. If a monk is possessed of these five qualities for 
striving, taking the Tathagata as leader, if he is instructed in the 
evening he will attain eminence in the morning; if he is instructed 
in the morning he will attain eminence in the evening.” 

When this had been said, Prince Bodhi spoke thus to the Lord: 
“ O what an Awakened One, 1 0 what a dhamma , O what a good 
teaching of dhamma in that if one is instructed in the evening he will 
attain eminence in the morning, if instructed in the morning he will 
attain eminence in the evening.” 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Sanjika’s son, spoke 
thus to Prince Bodhi: “ So this revered Bodhi speaks thus: * O what 
an Awakened One, 0 what a dhamma , 0 what a good teaching of 
dhamma / but then he does not say: ‘ I am going to that revered 

Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks/ ” 

" Do not, good Sanjika’s son, speak thus; do not, good Sanjika's 
son, speak thus. Face to face with my mother, good Sanjika’s son, 
have I heard this, [97] face to face have I learnt it. There was a 
time, good Sanjika’s son, when this Lord was staying at Kosambl in 
Ghosita’s monastery. Then my mother, who was with child, 


1 aho buddho , etc.; c/. Thag. 201, where ako is translated as “ All hail.” 



284 


II. 97-98 


85. Bodhirdjahumdrasutta 

approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, 
she sat down at a respectful distance. As she was sitting down at a 
respectful distance my mother spoke thus to the Lord: * Revered sir, 
my unborn child, whether a boy or a girl, is going to the Lord for 
refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the Lord 
accept this layfollower who is going for refuge from this day forth for 
as long as life lasts/ There was the time, good Sanjika’s son, when 
the Lord was staying here itself among the Bhaggas in Sumsuma- 
ragira in Bhesakala Grove in the deer-park. Then my nurse, carrying 
me on her hip, approached the Lord; having approached and having 
greeted the Lord, she stood at a respectful distance. As she was 
standing at a respectful distance, my nurse spoke thus to the Lord: 
‘ This, revered sir, is Prince Bodhi who is going for refuge to the 
Lord and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the Lord 
accept this layfollower who is going for refuge from this day forth 
for as long as life lasts/ Now I, good Sanjika’s son, am going for the 
third time to the Lord for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of 
monks, thinking: ‘ May the Lord accept me as a layfollower going 
for refuge from this day forth for as long as life lasts/ ” 

Discourse to Prince Bodhi : 

The Fifth 


86. DISCOURSE WITH ANGULIMALA 

(Angulimalasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Savatthi 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapii^dika’s monastery. Now at that time, 
in the realm of King Pasenadi of Kosala 1 there was a robber named 
Angulimala, 2 a hunter, bloody-handed, bent on death and destruc- 
tion, merciless to living creatures. Through him villages were 
depopulated 3 and [98] market towns were depopulated and country 

1 As this king is frequently mentioned in Suttas 86-90, 1 have almost always 
abbreviated his designation to; King Pasendi. 

* Meaning “ Garland of Fingers.” The S utasoma -jdta ka (No. 537) was 
preached concerning him. 

3 garnet pi agdrna kata , villages were rendered not-villages. 



II. 98-99 With Angulimala 285 

districts were depopulated. From his constant killing of people he 
wore a garland of fingers. Then the Lord, having dressed in the 
morning, taking his bowl and robe, entered Savatthi for almsfood ; 
having walked for alms in Savatthi, returning from the almsgathering 
after the meal, having packed away his lodging, taking his bowl and 
robe, he set out along a highway towards the robber Angulimala. 
Cowherds, goatherds, yeomen farmers and travellers saw the Lord 
as he was setting out along the highway towards the robber Anguli- 
mala. Having seen the Lord, they spoke thus to him: 

“ Do not, recluse, set out along this road. There is a robber on 
this road called Angulimala, a hunter, bloody-handed . . . Through 
him villages are depopulated ... he wears a garland of fingers. This 
is a road, recluse, along which ten or twenty or thirty or forty men 
set out only after they have collected together, and even they are at 
the mercy of the robber Angulimala.” 

When this had been said, the Lord, having become silent, went on. 
And a second time . . . And a third time the cowherds, goatherds . . , 
spoke thus to the Lord; “ Do not, recluse, set out along this road . . . 
(as above) . . . even they are at the mercy of the robber Angulimala.” 
Then the Lord, having become silent, went on. 

The robber Angulimala saw the Lord coming in the distance ; on 
seeing him, it occurred to him: “ Indeed it is wonderful, indeed it is 
marvellous. This is a road along which ten or twenty [99] or thirty 
or forty men set out only after they have collected together, and 
even they are at my mercy. And now this recluse is coming along 
alone, without a companion, it seems from choice. 1 Suppose I were 
to deprive this recluse of life ?” 

Then the robber Angulimala, having grasped his sword and shield, 
having armed himself with bow and quiver, followed close after the 
Lord. Then the Lord performed such a wonder of psychic power 
that the robber Angulimala, although walking with all his strength, 
was not able to catch up with the Lord who was walking at an 
ordinary pace. Then it occurred to the robber Angulimala ; ‘ Indeed 


1 pasayha . As this usually means “ by force, forcibly,* * there may be in 
the word some allusion here to the Teacher’s refusal to listen to all the 
pleadings and warnings which he encountered. The meaning here may how* 
ever be that Angulimala thinks: it seems that by using force (pasayha mannc) 
suppose I were to deprive him of life. But the syntax is against this. CPD . 
s.v. appamyha gives 44 irresistible,** e/. Monier* Williams, who for prasahya 
gives 1. to be resisted, conquered or defeated; 2. having withstood, over* 
powered or conquered; forcibly, violently, by force. 



286 


XI. 99-100 


86. Angulimalasutia 

it is wonderful, indeed it is marvellous. Although formerly I could 
attack and seize a running elephant ... a running horse ... a running 
chariot ... a running deer, now I, although walking with all my 
strength, am not able to catch up with this recluse who is walking at 
an ordinary pace.” Standing still, he said to the Lord; “Stand 
still, recluse, stand still, recluse.” 

“ I am standing still, Angulimala, you too stand still.” 

Then it occurred to the robber Angulimala; “ These recluses, sons 
of the Sakyans, are truth-speakers, approving of truth. But yet 
this recluse, while he is walking, says; ‘ I am standing still, Ahguli- 
mala, you too stand still/ Suppose I were to question this recluse ?” 
Then the robber Angulimala spoke out to the Lord in verses : l 

“ While you are walking, recluse, you say; ‘ I am standing still/ 
and you tell me, who am standing still, that I am not standing 
still. 

I ask you, recluse, about this matter: How is it that you are 
standing still, yet I am not standing still V 9 

“ I, Angulimala, am standing still, having for all beings every- 
where laid aside the stick, 

But you are unrestrained regarding creatures; therefore 7 am 
standing still, you are not standing still.” 

[100] “ Long it is since a great sage was honoured by me, yet 
this recluse is penetrating the Great Grove. 

I will soon get rid of evil, hearing dhamma in a verse of yours.” 

When the robber had spoken thus, he hurled his sword and 
weapons down a cliff, into a pit, a chasm. 

The robber honoured the Well-farer’s feet; there he asked for 
the going forth. 

The Awakened One and compassionate great sage who is the 
Teacher of the world with its devas , 

Thereupon said to him : “ Come, monk,” This itself was monk’s 
status for him. 

Then the Lord set out on tour for Savatthi with the venerable 
Angulimala as his attendant. In due course, walking on tour, he 


1 The verses ascribed to Angulimala are at Thag . 866 ff. 



II. 100-101 


287 


With Angulimala 

arrived at Savatthf. While he was there the Lord stayed near 
Savatthf, in the Jeta Grove in Anafchapii^dika’s monastery. Now 
at that time, a great concourse of people, having gathered together 
at the gate of King Pasenadi’s palace, were making a loud noise, a 
great noise, saying: “ There is a robber in your realm, sire, called 
Angulimala, a hunter, bloody-handed . . . Through him villages are 
depopulated ... he wears a garland of fingers. Let the king drive 
him out,” 

Then King Pasenadi, with as many as five hundred horses, left 
Savatthf early in the morning and started for the monastery. 
Having gone by vehicle as far as the ground permitted, he dismounted 
from his vehicle and approached the Lord on foot ; having approached, 
[101] having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
The Lord spoke thus to King Pasenadi as he was sitting down at a 
respectful distance: “ What is it, sire \ Is King Seniya Bimbisara 
of Magadha angry with you, or the Licehavis of Vesali, or some 
hostile king ?” 

“ Revered sir, it is not that King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha is 
angry with me, or the Licehavis of Vesali, or any hostile king. 
There is a robber in my realm, revered sir, named Angulimala, a 
hunter, bloody-handed . . . Through him villages are depopulated 
... he wears a garland of fingers. I, revered sir, shall never drive 
him out.” 

“ But 1 if you, sire, were to see the robber Angulimala, having had 
his hair and beard cut off, having donned saffron robes, having gone 
forth from home into homelessness, refraining from onslaught on 
creatures, refraining from taking what has not been given, refraining 
from lying speech, a one-meal-man, a Brahma-farer, virtuous, of 
lovely character — what would you do to him 1” 

“ Revered sir, we would salute him or rise up before him or offer 
him a seat or invite him to the requisites of robe-material, almsfood, 
lodgings and medicines for the sick, or we would have a proper 
watch and ward and guard provided for him. But whence could 

there be, revered sir, such control in moral habit for one of bad 

morality, of evil character ?” 

Now at that time the venerable Angulimala was sitting near the 
Lord. Then the Lord, stretching out his right arm, spoke thus to 
King Pasenadi: “ This, sire, is Angulimala.” 

Then King Pasenadi was afraid, alarmed and his hair stood on end. 


1 For this paragraph and the next, see also M . ii. 89. 



288 


II. 101— 103 


86. AngulimdlasuUa 

Then the Lord, knowing King Pasenadi’s terror and agitation and 
that his hair was standing on end, spoke thus to King Pasenadi: 
“ Do not be afraid, sire, do not be afraid, sire ; you have no cause for 
fear here.” Then King Pasenadi’s fear [102] and alarm and the 
standing of his hair on end all abated. Then King Pasenadi 
approached the venerable Ahgulimala; having approached, he spoke 
thus to the venerable Ahgulimala: 

“ Revered sir, is the master really Ahgulimala ?” 

“ Yes, sire.” 

“ Of what clan was the master’s father ? Of what clan his 
mother ?” 

“ Gagga was my father, sire, MantanI my mother.” 

“ Revered sir, let the master, the son of Gagga and Mantaitf, be 
of good cheer. I will make an effort in the matter of the requisites 
of robe-material . . . and medicines for the sick for the master, the 
son of Gagga and Mantaiil.” 

Now at that time the venerable Ahgulimala was a forest-dweller, 
an almsman, a rag-robe wearer, one who wore the three robes. So 
the venerable Ahgulimala spoke thus to King Pasenadi: “ No, sire, 
I am complete as to the three robes.” 

Then King Pasenadi approached the Lord; having approached, 
having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance, King Pasenadi spoke 
thus to the Lord: “ It is wonderful, revered sir, it is marvellous, 
revered sir, how this Lord, revered sir, tames the untamed, calms the 
uncalmed, helps to quell completely those that are not completely 
quelled. 1 Him, revered sir, that I was unable to tame with stick and 
sword, the Lord has tamed without stick or sword. Well, I am 
going now, revered sir, I am very busy, there is much to be done.” 

“ You do now, sire, that for which you deem it the right time.” 
Then King Pasenadi, rising from his seat, having greeted the Lord, 
departed keeping his right side towards him. 

Then the venerable Angulimala, having dressed in the morning, 
taking his bowl and robe, entered Savatthi for almsfood. And as 
the venerable Angulimala was walking in Savatthi on an uninter- 
rupted round for almsfood, he saw a woman in difficult and dangerous 
labour. On seeing her, [103] it occurred to him : “ Beings are indeed 
impure, beings are indeed impure.” 

Then the venerable Angulimala, haying walked in Savatthi for 

1 Or, “ is a helper to final nibbana ( parinibbapeta ) of those who have not 
reached final nibbana.” Cf. M . i. 235; D . iii. 54. 



II. 103-104 With Angulimala 289 

almsfood, on returning from the almsgathering after the meal, 
approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the Lord, 
he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down at a 
respectful distance, the venerable Angulimala spoke thus to the Lord : 
“ Now, I, revered sir, having dressed in the morning . . . And as I 
was walking in Savatthi ... I saw a woman ... it occurred to me : 
‘ Beings are indeed impure, beings are indeed impure.’ ” 

“ Well then, do you, Angulimala, approach Savatthi; having 
approached, speak thus to that woman : 1 1, sister, am not aware of 
having intentionally deprived any living thing of life since I was 
born. By this truth may there be well-being for you, well-being for 
the unborn child.’ ” 

“ But would not this be deliberate lying on my part, revered sir ? 
For, revered sir, many living things have been intentionally deprived 
of life by me.” 

“ Well then, do you, Angulimala, approach Savattln; having 
approached, speak thus to that woman: ‘ I, sister, am not aware of 
having intentionally deprived any living thing of life since I was born 
of the ariyan birth. By this truth may there be well-being for . . . 
the unborn child.’ ” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” and the venerable Angulimala, having answered 
the Lord in assent, approached Savatthi; having approached, he 
spoke thus to that woman : “ I, sister, am not aware of having inten- 
tionally deprived any living thing of life since I was bom of the 
ariyan birth. By this truth may there be well-being for . . . the 
unborn child.” 

Then the venerable Angulimala, living alone, aloof, diligent, 
ardent, self-resolute, having soon realised here and now by his own 
super-knowledge that matchless goal of the Brahma-faring for the 
sake of which young men of family rightly go forth from home into 
homelessness, entering on it, abided in it. And he knew : Destroyed 
is birth, brought to a close the Brahma-faring, done is what was to 
be done, there is no more of being [104] such or so. And so the 
venerable Angulimala was one of the perfected ones. 

Then the venerable Angulimala, having dressed in the morning, 
taking his bowl and robe, entered Savatthi for almsfood. Now at 
that time a clod of earth thrown by one man fell on the venerable 
Angulimala, also a stick thrown by another and gravel thrown by 
a third. 1 Then the venerable Angulimala, with a broken head 

1 MA . iii. 338 explains that these were thrown at marauding crows, dogs 
and pigs, but fell on the Elder. 



290 


II. 104-105 


86. Angulimdlasutta 

streaming with blood, his bowl smashed, and his outer cloak in 
tatters, approached the Lord. The Lord saw the venerable Ahguli- 
mala coming in the distance; seeing him, he spoke thus to the 
venerable Angulimala: “ Do you endure it, brahman, 1 do you endure 
it, brahman. You are experiencing here and now the ripening of 
that kamma through the ripening of which you would (otherwise) 
boil in Niraya Hell for many years, many hundreds of years, many 
thousands of years/’ Then the venerable Angulimala, as he was 
meditating in private, experienced the bliss of freedom, 2 and at that 
time uttered this solemn utterance: 

u He 3 who formerly was slothful but afterwards is diligent 

Illumes this world like the moon when freed from a cloud. 

He whose evilly done kamma is closed by what is skilled 

Illumes this world like the moon when freed from a cloud. 

Indeed, he who, a young monk, cleaves to the Awakened One’s 
Dispensation 

Illumines this world like the moon when freed from a cloud. 

Let my foes but hear talk on dhamma , let my foes but cleave to 
the Awakened One’s Dispensation, 

Let those men, my foes, but follow dhamma — and, calmed, only 
it will they accept. 

[105] Let my foes, from speakers on forbearance and commenders 
of gentleness 

Hear dhamma from time to time and act in conformity with it. 

Such a one would not harm me nor yet any other at all — 

He would attain the uttermost peace and guard those who have 
craving and those who have none. 4 

As 5 ditchers lead the water, as fletchers shape the shaft, 

As joiners shape the timber, so do the wise tame themselves. 

Some 6 are tamed by the stick, goads or whips; 

7, without stick, without weapon, was tamed by Him who is 
‘ Such.’ 

1 MA. iii. 339 says he was so called because his amvas were destroyed. 

• As Got&ma is recorded to have done at Vin. i. 1, etc. 

• The verses ascribed to Angulimala continue at Thag. 871 ff. The first 
two are also found at Dhp . 172, 173. 

4 tasathavara . MA. iii. 341 and Thag A. say that tasa means those with 
craving (satanha) while thavara means those without ( nittanha ). The word 
also occurs at Khp. IX. 4 (KhpA. 245 giving a slightly fuller explanation than 
MA. or Thag A.) and at Sn. 146. 

• This verse also at Dhp . 80, 145. 


• With this verse cf. Vin . ii. 196. 



II. 105 With Angulimdla 291 

My name is ‘ Harmless,’ 1 though once I harmful was. 

Today I am truly named, 2 for I harm no thing at all. 

Once I was the notorious robber Angulimala; 

Being swept away by the great flood, I came to the Awakened 
One for refuge. 

Once I was the notorious bloody-handed Angulimala — 

0 see my going for refuge, becoming’s cord 3 removed ! 

Me who had wrought such kamma as leads to many a woeful 
bourn, 

When touched by the ripening of kamma* debtless I enjoy an 
owner’s state. 5 

Fools, 6 folk poor in wisdom, pursue slothfulness; 

A wise man guards diligence as wealth supreme. 

Pursue 7 not slothfulness, be not acquainted with sensual 
delights — 

Meditating with diligence one attains abundant joy. 

Well 8 was (my) coming,® there is no departing, nor was I ill- 
advised — 

Among various truths 10 that which I follow is supreme. 


1 According to MA, iii. 329 Ahimsalta was his name while he was a student. 
ThagA . on the other hand says that Himsaka was his original name. See 
Pss, Breth p. 323, n. 3. 

* saccandmo *tnhu Although Saccanama, as 14 He whose name is Truth,” 
is among the epithets of the Buddha, it is not being used as an epithet here 
as is clear from the context. 

9 bhavanetti , explained at MA, iii. 342 as bhavarajju, the cord, called tanha 
(craving): 44 Creatures are bound in their hearts like cattle with a cord tied 
to their necks, and are led on ( niyanti ) to this or that becoming.” Bhavanetti 
is therefore the cord, lead or conduit tying to or leading to 44 becoming.” 

4 kammavipdka is called maggacetand, determination in or will for the Way. 
Inasmuch as kamma is boiled and destroyed by this means, this means is 
therefore called kammavipdka . 

6 bhuiijdmi bhojanam . Also at Thag, 789. MA, iii. 343, Vism, 43, Jd. v. 
253 distinguish four kinds of paribhoga , enjoyment, use. Here sdmiparibhoga 
is meant : that of a master or owner, one whose dsam are destroyed, Bhojana 
might therefore be translated here as 44 usage,” 44 status ” or even 41 privilege,” 
44 right.” 

• Verse also at Dhp . 26, S. i. 25. 

7 Verse also at Dhp. 27 (reading vipidam sukham , 44 abundant joy,” as 
M , above), and Thag, 884 and 8, i. 25 (both reading paramam sukham), 

* This verse also at Thag. 9. 

• ThagA . i, 55 says svagatam means either: this coming of mine was 
beautiful; or, well was the coming on my part, i.e. to the Buddha's presence. 

10 dhammd could mean either 44 truths, teachings,” as it appears to do at 



292 86. Angulimalastdta II. 105-106 

Well was (my) coming, there is no departing, nor was I ill- 
advised — 

Won is the threefold knowledge, done is the teaching of the 
Awakened One.” 

Discourse with Angulimala: 

The Sixth 


87. DISCOURSE ON " BORN OF AFFECTION ” 

(Piyajatikasutta) 

[106] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
SavatthI in the Jeta Grove in Anathapiijdika’s monastery. Now at 
that time the dear and beloved little only son of a certain house- 
holder had passed away. After he had passed away he (the father) 
had no inclination for work or for food. Going constantly to the 
cemetery, he wailed: “ Where are you, little only son ? Where are 
you, little only son ?” Then that householder approached the 
Lord ; having approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at 
a respectful distance. The Lord spoke thus to that householder as 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance : 

41 Have not you, householder, controlling faculties for stilling 
your own mind ? There is a change in your faculties.” 

“ But how could there be no change in my faculties, Lord ? For, 
Lord, my dear and beloved little only son has passed away. Since 
he passed away I have no inclination for work or food. Going 
constantly to the cemetery, I wail: * Where are you, little only son ? 
Where are you, little only son V ” 

“ That is just it, householder. For, householder, grief, sorrow, 
suffering, lamentation and despair are bom of affection, originate in 
affection.” 

“ But for whom, Lord, could this hold good in this way: ‘ Grief 
, . . and despair are bom of affection, originate in affection V For, 
Lord, bliss and happiness are born of affection, originate in affection.” 

ThagA . i. 65; or “ states of mind ” which, as nibbana, it appears to mean at 
MA. iii. 343. There are a number of variant readings for the preceding and 
qualifying word; in the M. text it is palibhattesu. 



II. 106-108 On “ Born of Affection ” 293 

Then the householder, not rejoicing in what the Lord had said, 
repudiating it, rising from his seat, departed. 

Now at that time a number of gamblers were playing dice not far 
from the Lord. Then that householder approached these gamblers; 
having approached, he spoke thus to these gamblers: “ Now, I, sirs, 
approached the recluse [107] Gotama; having approached, having 
greeted the recluse Gotama, I sat down at a respectful distance. 
Then, sirs, the recluse Gotama spoke thus to me as I was sitting 
down at a respectful distance: * Have not you, householder, control- 
ling faculties (as above) . « Then I, sirs, not rejoicing in 

what the Lord had said, repudiating it, rising from my seat, 
departed.” 

“That is just it, householder, that is just it, householder; for, 
householder, bliss and happiness are bom of affection, originate in 
affection.” 

Then the householder, thinking: “ There is agreement between 
me and the gamblers,” departed. Then this subject of conver- 
sation 1 * gradually penetrated the royal palace. And King Pasenadi 
of Kosala spoke thus to Queen Mallika: “ This was said to these, 
Mallika, by the recluse Gotama : ‘ Grief, sorrow, suffering, lamen- 
tation and despair are bom of affection, originate in affection.’ ” 

“ If this, sire, was said by the Lord, it is so.” 

“ As the recluse Gotama speaks so does Mallika because she is much 
delighted with him: ( If this, sire, was said by the Lord, it is so.’ 
It is just as when a teacher speaks to his pupil and the pupil is so 
much delighted with him that he says * It is just so, teacher, it is 
just so, teacher.’ Even so do you, Mallika, because you are so much 
delighted with what the recluse Gotama says, say: * If this, [108] 
sire, was said by the Lord, it is so.’ Be off, Mallika, go away.” 

Then Queen Mallika summoned the brahman Nalijangha, and 
said: 4 Come you, brahman, approach the Lord; having approached, 
in my name salute the Lord’s feet with your head and ask whether 
he is well, not indisposed, of bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort ; 
and say: * Lord, Queen Mallika salutes the Lord's feet with her head, 
and asks whether lie is well . . . abiding in comfort,’ and then say: 

4 Revered sir, were these words spoken by the Lord : Grief, sorrow, 
suffering, lamentation and despair are born of affection, originate 
in affection V And when you have mastered well what the Lord 


1 kaihdvalthu , matter, topic of talk, as at M. ii. 127, 132. Also the name of 

one of the Abhidkamma books. 




294 87. Piyajdtikasuita II. 108-109 

explains to you, you must tell me. For Tathagatas do not speak 
against the truth.” 1 

“ Yes, madam,” and the brahman Najijangha, having answered 
Queen Mallika in assent, approached the Lord; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a cour- 
teous and friendly way, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he 
was sitting down at a respectful distance, the brahman Najijangha 
spoke thus to the Lord; “ Good Gotama, Queen Mallika with her 
head salutes the good Gotama’s feet and asks whether he is well . . . 
abiding in comfort. And she speaks thus: ‘ Revered sir, were these 
words spoken by the Lord : Grief, sorrow . . . originate in affection V ” 

“ It is just so, brahman, it is just so, brahman. For, brahman, 
grief, sorrow . . . originate in affection. And this is a way, brahman, 
in which it can be said that grief, sorrow . . . originate in affection: 
Once upon a time, brahman, in this very Savatthi a certain woman’s 
mother had passed away. Since her passing away, she (the 
daughter), unbalanced and unhinged, went from street to street, 
from cross-road to cross-road, saying: ‘Have you not seen my 
mother ? Have you not seen my mother ?’ 

[109] This too is a way, brahman, in which it can be said that grief, 
sorrow . . . originate in affection: Once upon a time, brahman, in 
this very Savatthi a certain woman’s father . . . brother, sister, son, 
daughter, husband had passed away. Since his (her) passing away, 
she . . . went . . . from cross-road to cross-road, saying: 1 Have you 
not seen my husband ? Have you not seen my husband V 

This too is a way, brahman, in which it can be said that grief, 
sorrow . . . originate in affection : Once upon a time, brahman, in this 
very Savatthi a certain man’s mother . . . father . . . brother, sister, 
son, daughter, wife passed away. Since her (his) passing away, he, 
unbalanced and unhinged, went from street to street, from cross-road 
to cross-road, saying: ‘ Have you not seen my wife ? Have you not 
seen my wife V 

This too is a way, brahman, in which it can be said that grief, 
sorrow . . . originate in affection: Once upon a time, brahman, in this 
very Savatthi, a certain woman went to her relation’s family. 
Those relations of hers, having forcibly taken her from her husband, 
desired to give her to another, but she did not want him. Then that 
woman spoke thus to her husband: ‘These relations of mine, 
master, having forcibly taken me from you, want to give me to 


1 vitatham, as at D. ii. 73. 



II. 109-111 


On " Born of Affection ” 


295 


another, but I do not want him.’ Then that man, having cut that 
woman in two, [110] destroyed himself, thinking: ‘We will both 
come to be hereafter.’ This too is a way, brahman, in which grief, 
sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair are bom of affection, 
originate in affection.” 

Then the brahman Najijangha, having rejoiced in what the Lord 
had said, having given thanks, rising from his seat approached Queen 
Mallika; having approached, he recounted to her the whole of the 
conversation he had had with the Lord. Then Queen Mallika 
approached King Pasenadi; having approached, she spoke thus to 
Xing Pasenadi: “ What do you think about this, sire ? Is your 
daughter Vajirl dear to you ?” 

“ Yes, Mallika. My daughter Vajirl is dear to me.” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? From an alteration and 
otherness in your daughter Vajirl would there arise in you grief, 
sorrow . , . despair ?” 

“ From an alteration and otherness, Mallika, in my daughter 
Vajirl there would be a change for me, even for life. How should 
there not arise in me grief, sorrow . . . and despair ?” 

“ It was in reference to this, sire, that it was said by the Lord, 
who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self- A wakened One: 
‘ Grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair are born of 
affection, originate in affection. * What do you think about this, 
sire ? Is the noble lady Vasabha 1 dear to you ?” 

“ Yes, Mallika, the noble lady Vasabha is dear to me.” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? From an alteration and 
otherness . . . would there arise in you grief . . . and despair ?” 

“ From an alteration . . . there would be a change for me, even for 
life. How should there not arise in me grief . . . and despair ?” 

“ It was in reference to this, sire, that it was said by the Lord . . . : 
‘ Grief, sorrow . . . originate in affection.’ What do you think about 
this, sire ? Is the General Vidudabha 2 dear to you ?” [Ill] . . . 3 
Am I dear to you ? 3 . . . What do you think about this, sire ? Are 

the peoples of Kasi and Kosala dear to you ?” 

“ Yes, Mallika, the peoples of Kasi and Kosala are dear to me. 
Because of their might we obtain sandal wood from the country of 
Kasi and use sweet-smelling garlands and perfumes.” 

“ What do you think about this, sire ? From an alteration and 

1 According to MA. iii. 345 she was one of the King’s consorts. 

2 Son of Pasenadi and Vasabha. 

3 The text repeats in full the whole conversation as in the case of Vajirl. 



296 87. PiyajdtikasuUa II. 111-112 

otherness in the peoples of Kasi and Kosala would there arise in you 
grief . . . and despair V* 

“ From an alteration and otherness, Mallika, in the peoples of 
Kasi and Kosala there would be a change for me, even for life. How 
should there not arise in me grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and 
despair ?” 

“ It was in reference to this, sire, that it was said by the Lord, 
who knows, who sees, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One: 
* Grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair are bom of 
affection, originate in affection.’ ” 

“ It is wonderful, Mallika, it is marvellous, Mallika, how much 
[112] the Lord, penetrating through wisdom, sees by means of 
wisdom. 1 Come, Mallika, let me wash (ceremonially).”* 

Then King Pasenadi, rising from his seat, having arranged his 
upper garment over one shoulder, having saluted the Lord with 
joined palms, three times uttered this solemn utterance: " Praise to 
the Lord, the perfected one, the fully Self- Awakened One.” 

Discourse on “ Bom of Affection ” : 

The Seventh 


88. DISCOURSE ON THE FOREIGN CLOTH 

(Bahitikasutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near SavatthI 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s monastery. Then the 
venerable Ananda, having dressed in the morning, taking his bowl 
and robe entered SavatthI for almafood. When he had walked for 
almsfood in SavatthI, returning from the alms-gathering after the 
meal, he approached the palace of Migara’s mother and the Eastern 

i Of. M , i. 480, ii. 173; A. ii. 115416. ~~ _ 

* dcdmehi . The commentarial acamehi is to be preferred, unless acdmeki 
is a causative form; at Ja. vi. 8 we get dcamdpeti , which the sense of MA* 
iii. 346 seems to suggest, for it implies that although Pasenadi, and not 
Mallika, was to perform the ceremonial ablution, she was enjoined to make 
this possible for her husband by providing him with rinsing water. His 
ablution would then consist in rinsing ceremonially, dcamtivd, washing his 
hands and feet and rinsing out his mouth before he paid his respects to the 
Teacher. 




II. 112-113 


297 


On the Foreign Cloth 

monastery for the day-sojourn. At that time King Pasenadi of 
Kosala, having mounted the bull-elephant Ekapuodarika (One- 
Lotus), set forth from Savatthi in the early morning. King Pasenadi 
saw the venerable Ananda coming in the distance; seeing him, he 
addressed the chief minister, Sirivaddha, saying: “ Dear Sirivaddha, 
is not this the venerable Ananda ?” 

“ Yes, sire, this is the venerable Ananda.” Then King Pasenadi 
addressed another man, saying: “ Come you, my good man, approach 
the venerable Ananda ; in my name salute the venerable Ananda’s 
feet with your head, saying: 4 Revered sir, King Pasenadi salutes the 
venerable Ananda’s feet with his head,’ and then say: ‘ If, revered 
sir, there is really nothing urgent to be done by the venerable Ananda, 
please, revered sir, let the venerable Ananda wait [113] for a moment 
out of compassion.’ ” 

“ Yes, sire,” and this man having answered King Pasenadi in 
assent, approached the venerable Ananda ; having approached and 
having greeted the venerable Ananda, he stood at a respectful 
distance. As this man was standing at a respectful distance, he 
spoke thus to the venerable Ananda: “ Revered sir, King Pasenadi 
of Kosala salutes the venerable Ananda’s feet with his head, and 
speaks thus: ‘ If there is really . . , out of compassion.’ ” The 
venerable Ananda consented by becoming silent. Then King 
Pasenadi, having gone by the bull-elephant as far as the ground was 
possible for the elephant, having dismounted, approached the 
venerable Ananda on foot; having approached, having greeted the 
venerable Ananda, he stood at a respectful distance. As he was 
standing at a respectful distance, Kang Pasenadi spoke thus to the 
venerable Ananda: “ If, revered sir, there is nothing urgent to be 
done by the venerable Ananda, it were good, revered sir, that the 
venerable Ananda should approach the bank of the river Aciravatl 
out of compassion.” And the venerable Ananda consented by 
becoming silent. 

Then the venerable Ananda approached the bank of the river 
Aciravatl; haying approached, he sat down on a seat made ready at 
the root of a tree. Then King Pasenadi, having gone by bull- 
elephant as far as the ground was possible for the elephant, having 
dismounted, approached the venerable Ananda on foot; having 
approached ... (as above) . . . spoke thus to the venerable Ananda: 
“ Now, revered sir, let the venerable Ananda sit down on this 
elephant-rug.” 1 


* See above, p. 259, ». 3. 



298 


II. 113-114 


88. Bahitikasutta 

“ No, sire ; you sit down, I am sitting on a seat of my own.” King 
Pasenadi sat down on the prepared seat. As King Pasenadi was 
sitting down, he spoke thus to the venerable Ananda: “ Revered 
Ananda, would the Lord engage not in such bodily conduct 1 as was 
offensive to* intelligent recluses and brahmans 1” 

“ No, sire, the Lord would not engage in such bodily conduct as 
was offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans. 11 

[1141 " But, revered Ananda, would the Lord engage not in such 
conduct of speech . , . conduct of thought , . . V* 

“ No, sire, the Lord would not engage in such conduct of speech 
, . , conduct of thought as was offensive to intelligent recluses and 
brahmans.” 

“ It is wonderful, revered sir, it is marvellous, revered sir — what I 
was not able to convey fully in a question has been, revered sir, fully 
conveyed by the venerable Ananda in answer to the question. 
Revered sir, when those who are ignorant and inexperienced speak 
in praise or dispraise of others without test or scrutiny, 3 we do not 
fall back on that as the pith (of the matter). But, revered sir, when 
those who are wise, experienced, clever, speak in praise or dispraise 
of others after test and scrutiny, we fall back on that as the pith (of 
the matter). But what, revered Ananda, is the bodily conduct that 
is offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans ?” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is unskilled.” 

“ But what, revered sir, is unskilled bodily conduct 1” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that has a blemish,” 

“ But what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that has a blemish ?” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is injurious.” 

14 And what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that is injurious 1” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is ill in result.” 

11 And what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that is ill in result ?” 

44 Whatever bodily conduct, sire, conduces to torment of self and 
conduces to torment of others and conduces to torment of both, and 
of which the unskilled states increase much, the skilled states dwindle 
away — bodily conduct such as this, sire, is offensive to intelligent 
recluses and brahmans.” 

44 And what, revered Ananda, is the conduct of speech . . . the 
conduct of thought that is offensive to intelligent recluses and 

1 As at Vin. ii. 248. 

* Or, a slur on, opdrambha . M A. iii. 346, explaining as nparambham dosam 
aropanaraho , refers to the story of the murderous wanderers at Ud . IV. 8. 

* Cf. A. i. 89, ii. 3, 84. 



11.114-116 On the Foreign Cloth 299 

brahmans V 9 ♦ . . [116] . . . (As above , reading (1) conduct of speech 
(2) conduct of thought/or bodily conduct) conduct of thought 
such as this, sire, is offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans.’ * 

“ Revered Ananda, does not the Lord praise the getting rid of 
precisely all unskilled states ?” 

“ The Tathagata, sire, has got rid of all unskilled states and is 
endowed with skilled states.” 1 

“ But which, revered Ananda, is the bodily conduct that is not 
offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans ?” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is skilled.” 

“ But what, revered sir, is skilled bodily conduct V 9 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that has no blemish.” 

“ But what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that has no blemish ?” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is non-injurious.” 

“ And what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that is non- 
injurious ?” 

“ Whatever the bodily conduct, sire, that is joyous in result.” 

“ And what, revered sir, is the bodily conduct that is joyous in 
result ?” 

“ Whatever bodily conduct, sire, does not conduce to the torment 
of self and does not conduce to the torment of others and does not 
conduce to the torment of both, and of which the unskilled states 
dwindle away, the skilled states increase much — bodily conduct such 
as this, sire, is not offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans.” 

“ And what, revered Ananda, is the conduct of speech . . . the 
conduct of thought that is not offensive to intelligent recluses and 
brahmans ?” . . . [116] . . . (As above , reading (1) conduct of speech 
(2) conduct of thought/or bodily conduct) . . .“ . . . conduct of thought 
such as this, sire, is not offensive to intelligent recluses and brahmans.” 

“ But, revered Ananda, does the Lord praise the acquiring of 
precisely all skilled states ?” 

“ The Tathagata, sire, has got rid of all unskilled states and is 
endowed with skilled states.” 

“ It is wonderful, revered sir, it is marvellous, revered sir, how 

well spoken is this, revered sir, by the venerable Ananda ; and we, 
revered sir, are delighted and satisfied with the venerable Ananda’s 
well spoken words. Being thus delighted and satisfied, revered sir, 
with the venerable Ananda’s well spoken words, we would give a 


1 A reference is intended here to; yathdkdrl tathdvadi, as he does so he 
speaks (D. iii. 135). 



300 


88. BShitilcamtta 


II. 116-117 


valuable elephant to the venerable Ananda if this, revered sir, were 
allowable to the venerable Ananda, likewise a valuable horse, 
likewise the boon of a village if these, revered sir, were allowable to 
the venerable Ananda. But then we know this, revered sir: This 
is not allowable to the venerable Ananda. This piece of foreign 
cloth, 1 * revered sir, inserted into the shaft of a sunshade, has been 
sent to me by King Ajatasattu of Magadha, the son of (the lady) 
Videhl; in length it is equal to sixteen (hands*), in breadth to eight 
(hands). Revered sir, let the venerable Ananda accept it out of 
compassion. ,, 

“ No, sire, I am complete as to the three robes.” 

[117] “ Revered sir, after a great storm has rained down on the 
high mountain slopes, both you and I have seen how at such a time 
the river Aciravatl rushes along overflowing both its banks 3 — even 
so, revered sir, the venerable Ananda can make a set of three robes 
for himself from this piece of foreign cloth ; and the venerable Ananda 
can distribute his old set of three robes among his fellow Brahma- 
farers. So will this gift of faith of ours go on with an overflow, 
methinks. Revered sir, let the venerable Ananda accept this piece 
of foreign cloth.” 

And the venerable Ananda accepted the piece of foreign cloth. 
Then King Pasenadi spoke thus to the venerable Ananda: “ If it 
please you, we are going now, revered sir, we are very busy, there is 
much to be done.” 

“ You must do now, sire, that for which you deem it the right 
time.” 

Then King Pasenadi, having rejoiced in what the venerable 
Ananda had said, giving thanks, rising from his seat and greeting the 
venerable Ananda, departed keeping his right side towards him. 
Then not long after King Pasenadi had departed, the venerable 
Ananda approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted 
the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting 
down at a respectful distance the venerable Ananda told the Lord 
the whole of the conversation he had had with King Pasenadi, and 
he handed that piece of foreign cloth to the Lord. Then the Lord 
addressed the monks, saying: “ Monks, it is a gain for King Pasenadi, 

1 bahitikd . MA> iii. 347 says it is the name of a cloth or garment, vattka, 
produced outside the kingdom. 

* So MA. iii, 347 and cf» Miln. 317. Hattha ia more correctly hand and 
forearm. 

• Cf . Miln . 30. 



II. 117-118 


301 


On the Foreign Cloth 

it is well gotten by King Pasenadi that he achieved a sight of Ananda, 
that he achieved a paying of homage to him.” Thus spoke the 
Lord; delighted, these monks rejoiced in what the Lord had said. 

Discourse on the Foreign Cloth: 

The Eighth 


89. DISCOURSE ON TESTIMONIES TO 
DHAMMA 

(Dhammacetiyasutta) 

[118] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying among 
the Sakyans. Medajumpa 1 * was the name of the market town 
belonging to the Sakyans. At that time King Pasenadi of Kosala 
had arrived at Nangaraka* on some business or other. Then King 
Pasenadi addressed Dlgha Karayana, 3 saying: u Good Karayana, 
harness some lovely vehicles; we are going to the garden of the 
pleasaunce to see its beauties.” 

“ Yes, sire/* and Dlgha Karayana, having answered King Pasenadi 
in assent, having had many lovely vehicles harnessed, announced to 
King Pasenadi: “ Many lovely vehicles are harnessed for you, sire. 
You may deem it is now the right time for that,” Then King 
Pasenadi, having mounted one of the lovely vehicles, set forth from 
Nangaraka with the many lovely vehicles and with great royal pomp, 
and drew near the park. When he had gone by vehicle as far as the 
ground was possible, dismounting from the vehicle, he entered the 
park on foot. As King Pasenadi was pacing up and down in the 
park and roaming about on foot he saw charming and attractive 
roots of trees, quiet and silent, without folk's breath, far from the 
haunts of men, suitable for solitary meditation, 4 Seeing them, lie 
began to remember the Lord, thinking: “ It is at these charming and 
attractive roots of trees . . . suitable for solitary meditation, that we 


1 MA . iii. 348: Medatalumpa ; DhA . i. 356= Ja. iv. 151: Ujuinpa. 

* According to M. iii. 104 and MA . iii. 348 this was a market* town, nigama 9 
of the Sakyans. 

* Nephew of Bandhula, the commander-in *chief of the Mallas, MA . iii. 349. 

4 As at Vin, i. 39, ii. 158, etc. 



302 


II. 118-119 


can pay homage to that Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened 
One.” Then King Pasenadi addressed Digha Karayana, saying : “ It 

is, good Karayana, at these charming and attractive roots of trees 
. . . that we can pay homage to this Lord . . . fully Self- Awakened 
One. Where, good Karayana, [119] is this Lord staying at present, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One ?” 

“ Sire, there is a market town of the Sakyans called Medajumpa. 
The Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, is staying there 
at present.” 

“ Now, how far, good Karayana, is Meda}umpa, the market town 
of the Sakyans, from Nangaraka ?” 

“ It is not far, sire; it is three yojanas. It is possible to get to it 
in what remains of the day.” 

“ Well then, good Karayana, harness many lovely vehicles, we 
will go to see this Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One.” 

“ Yes, sire,” and Digha Karayana, having answered King Pasenadi 
in assent, having had many lovely vehicles harnessed, announced 
to King Pasenadi : “Many lovely vehicles are harnessed for you, sire. 
You may deem it is now the right time for that.” Then King Pase- 
nadi, having mounted one of the lovely vehicles, set forth from 
Nangaraka with the many lovely vehicles and drew near Medajumpa, 
the market town of the Sakyans, arriving there in what remained 
of that day, and approached the park. 1 * When he had gone by vehicle 
as far as the ground was possible, dismounting from the vehicle, he 
entered the park on foot. Now at that time several monks were 
pacing up and down in the open air. Then King Pasenadi ap- 
proached these monks; having approached, he spoke thus to these 
monks; “ Where, revered sirs, is the Lord staying at present, per- 
fected one, fully Self- Awakened One ? We are anxious to see the 
Lord . . . Self-Awakened One.” 

“ Sire, this is the dwelling-place; the door is closed. Having 
approached quietly, having entered the verandah (but) not crossing 

it, having coughed, tap on the door-bolt. The Lord will open the 
door to you.”* Then King Pasenadi immediately handed his sword 
and turban 3 to Digha Karayana. Then it occurred to Digha 
Karayana: “ The King wants to be alone now; must I now remain 
just where I am ?” Then King Pasenadi having quietly approached 

1 Cf, A . v. 65-66, several of the details of which vary however from the 
M. account. 

* As at Vin . i. 248. See B.D . iv. 342 for notes. 

* Two of the five emblems of royalty, see e.g. Jd . v. 264. 



II, 119-121 


On Testimonies to Dhamma 


303 


that dwelling-place with its closed door, having entered the verandah 
(but) not crossing it, coughed and tapped on the door-bolt. The 
Lord opened the door. Then King Pasenadi, [ 120 ] having entered 
the dwelling-place, 1 having inclined his head to the Lord’s feet, 
kissed the Lord’s feet on all sides with his mouth and stroked them 
on all sides with his hands, and he made known his (own) name: 
“ I, revered sir, am King Pasenadi of Kosala; I, revered sir, am 
King Pasenadi of Kosala.” 

“ But for what special reason do you, sire, pay such deep respect 
to this body 2 and display such tokens of friendship V 9 

“ Revered sir, for me there is a logical consequence 3 of the Lord’s 
dhamma: ‘ The fully Self- Awakened One is the Lord, well taught is 
dhamma by the Lord, the Lord’s Order of disciples fares along well.’ 
I, revered sir, see some recluses and brahmans here, faring a restricted 
Brahma-faring for ten, twenty, thirty and forty years. After a 
time these, well washed, 4 well anointed, with their hair and beards 
trimmed, parade about in the full possession and enjoyment of the 
five strands of sense-pleasures. On the other hand I, revered sir, 
see monks here faring a perfectly fulfilled, perfectly purified Brahma- 
faring all their lives long until their last breath. And outside this, 
revered sir, I behold no other Brahma-faring so perfectly fulfilled 
and perfectly purified. This, revered sir, is a logical consequence of 
the Lord’s dhamma: ‘ The fully Self- A wakened One is the Lord . . . 
fares along well.* 

And again, revered sir, kings quarrel with kings, and nobles 
quarrel with nobles, and brahmans quarrel with brahmans, and 
householders quarrel with householders, and a mother quarrels with 
a child, and a child quarrels with the mother, and a father quarrels 
with a child, and a child quarrels with the father, and a brother 
quarrels with a brother, and a brother quarrels with a sister, and a 
sister quarrels with a brother, and friend quarrels with friend. But 
I, revered sir, see monks here living on friendly terms and harmonious, 
not quarrelling, like milk and water blending, [121] regarding one 

another with the eye of affection. But outside this, revered sir, I 

1 It was at this juncture that Dlgha Karayana made Vi^utfabha king 
instead of Pasenadi, MA . iii. 352, Jd . iv. 151-152, DhA. i. 356. 

2 Cf. S. iii. 120, “ What is there in seeing this vile body of mine ?** 

8 dhammanvaya , as at M. i, 69. The A. account breaks off here, and 
Pasenadi gives, as recorded there, quite different reasons for his deep respect. 

4 aunhdta. This and the next two words also at S . i. 79, iv. 343, and cf. 
D. i. 104. Sunkata probably refers to ceremonial washing rather than to the 
bathing at fortnightly intervals allowed to monks at Vin. iv. 117. 



304 


II. 121-122 


89. Dhammaceliyamtta 

behold no other such harmonious company. And this too, revered 
sir, is for me a logical consequence of Lord’s dhamma . * The fully 

Self-Awakened is the Lord . . . fares along well.’ 

And again, I, revered sir, pace up and down and roam about from 
one park to another, from one pleasaunce to another. And there I 
see some recluses and brahmans who are thin, wretched, their colour 
bad, yellowish, their veins standing out on their limbs, methinks not 
at all pleasing to behold. So it occurs to me thus, revered sir: 
Undoubtedly these venerable ones are faring the Brahma-faring 
displeased, or there is some evil kamma done by them and concealed, 1 
and that is why these venerable ones are thin, wretched . . . not at 
all pleasing to behold. So, approaching these venerable ones, I 
speak thus: ‘How is it that you, venerable ones, are thin . . . 
wretched . . . not at all pleasing to behold V They say: ‘ It is an 
illness that runs in our families, 2 sire.’ On the other hand I, revered 
sir, see monks here who are very joyful, very exultant, looking 
contented and cheerful, living unconcerned, unruffled, dependent 
on others, 3 with a mind become as a wild creature’s. So it occurs 
to me, revered sir: Undoubtedly these venerable ones recognise a 
high excellence in the Lord’s teaching, a gradual accomplishing, 4 
and that is why these venerable ones are very joyful, very exultant 
. . . living . . . with a mind become as a wild creature’s. And this 
too is for me, revered sir, a logical consequence of the Lord’s dhamma : 
‘ The fully Self- Awakened One is the Lord . . . fares along well.’ 

And again, revered sir, I, a noble anointed king, [122] am able to 
execute one deserving execution, to fine one deserving to be fined, 
to banish one deserving banishment. But when I am sitting on a 
case, people sometimes speak interrupting (me). And I get no 
chance to say: ‘ While I am sitting on the case do not, good sirs, 
speak interrupting (me). Let the good sirs wait until I have finished 
speaking/ But I, revered sir, see monks here at a time when the 
Lord is teaching dhamma to various assemblies, and at that time 
there is no sound of expectorating among the Lord’s disciples, no 


1 CJ. Vin, ii. 40 ff. t where an offence that has not been confessed is still 
4 concealed/ hidden or covered, paticchanna. 

* handhukaroga . Bandhu is of course kinsman, and although a v.l. is 
panduka - (jaundice), MA. iii. 353 explains by kuiarogo amhakam , a family 
illness of ours, of hereditary nature. 

* paradavutia, see B.D . v. 259, n, 2. 

4 pubbendpara visesa , from fomna-meditation through vipassand (insight, 
a higher form of meditation) to arahantship, MA. iii. 353. 



II. 122-123 


On Testimonies to Dhamma 


305 


sound of coughing. 1 Once upon a time, revered sir, when the Lord 
was teaching dhamma to various assemblies a certain disciple of the 
Lord coughed ; one of his fellow Brahma-farers tapped his knee and 
said : * Let the venerable one be quiet, let the venerable one make no 
noise; the Lord, our Teacher, is teaching dhamma f 1 In connection 
with this it occurred to me, revered sir: c Indeed, it is wonderful, 
indeed it is marvellous; assuredly, how well trained — without stick, 2 
without sword — must be such an assembly.’ And outside this, 
revered sir, I see no other assembly well trained thus. And this too 
is for me, revered sir, a logical consequence of the Lord’s dhamma : 

* The fully Self-Awakened One is the Lord . . . fares along well.’ 

And again, revered sir, I see here some clever nobles, 3 subtle, 
practised in disputing with others, skilled in hair-splitting, who go 
about, methinks, breaking to pieces in their wisdom the views (of 
others). These hear: 1 Undoubtedly the recluse Gotama will visit a 
certain village or market town. * They construct a question, thinking : 

* Having approached the recluse Gotama, we will ask him this 
question of ours. If, on being asked by us thus, he answers thus, we 
will refute him thus ; and if, on being asked by us thus, he answers 
thus, we will refute him thus.’ These hear: ‘ It is certain that the 
recluse Gotama is visiting a certain village or market town.’ So they 
approach the Lord. The Lord gladdens, rouses, incites, [123] 
delights them with talk on dhamma . These, gladdened . , . delighted 
by the Lord with talk on dhamma, do not ask the Lord the question 
at all — whence can they refute him ? On the contrary, they become 
the Lord’s disciples. This too is for me, revered sir, a logical 
consequence of the Lord’s dhamma : * The fully Self- A wakened One 
is the Lord . . . fares along well.’ 

And again, revered sir, I see here some clever brahmans 4 . , . clever 
householders . . . clever recluses ... (os above) . . . whence can they 
refute him ? On the contrary, they ask leave of the Lord himself 
for the going forth from home into homelessness. The Lord lets 
them go forth. These, gone forth like this, living alone, aloof, 


1 Cf. M, ii. 4-5. 

1 dartda here possibly means more specifically “ punishment,” to balance 
the punishments meted out by the king, above; but we have not infrequently 
had the pair: (without) stick and (without) sword. 

* Cf. following passage with M. i. 176 /. 

4 At M* i. 176 the brahmans are like the nobles w ho “ on the contrary, 
become the Lord’s disciples.” Thus a pair is formed to balance the other 
pair — householders and recluses — w ho ask for the going forth. The reading 
at Jjf. i. 176 is to be preferred. 



II. 123-124 


306 89. Dhammacetiyasutta 

diligent, ardent, self-resolute, having by their own super-knowledge 
soon realised here and now that matchless goal of the Brahma-faring 
for the sake of which young men of family rightly go forth from 
home into homelessness, entering on it, abide in it. These speak 
thus: ‘ Indeed we were nearly lost, indeed we were nearly lost, for 
while we were formerly not (true) recluses, we claimed that we were, 
saying: We are recluses. Not being (true) brahmans, we claimed 
that we were saying; We are brahmans. Not being (true) perfected 
ones, we claimed that we were saying: We are perfected ones. But 
now we really are recluses, now we really are brahmans, now we 
really are perfected ones.’ This too is for me, revered sir, a logical 
consequence of the Lord’s dhamma : * The fully Self-Awakened One 
is the Lord . . . fares along well.’ 

And again, revered sir, I see here the equerries 1 Isidatta and 
Purana 2 whose food is mine, whose vehicles are mine, 3 for whom I 
provide a livelihood and to whom I bring fame. But yet they do 
not [124] pay me respect as they do the Lord. Once upon a time, 
revered sir, while marching against an army, in order to test these 
same equerries, Isidatta and Purana, I took up my quarters in some 
cramped habitation. Then, revered sir, these equerries, Isidatta and 
Purana, having passed the greater part of the night in talk on 
dhamma, lay down with their heads directed towards where they 
had heard that the Lord was, their feet towards me. In connection 
with this, revered sir, it occurred to me: ‘ Indeed it is wonderful, 
indeed it is marvellous. These equerries, Isidatta and Purana, whose 
food is mine, whose vehicles are mine, for whom I provide a livelihood 
and to whom I bring fame, yet do not pay me respect as they do the 
Lord. Undoubtedly these venerable ones recognise a high excel- 
lence in this Lord’s teaching, a gradual accomplishing.’ And this too 
is for me, revered sir, a logical consequence of the Lord’s teaching: 

• The fully Self-Awakened One is the Lord; well taught is dhamma 
by the Lord; the Lord’s Order of disciples fares along well.’ 

And again, revered sir, the Lord is a noble, I too am a noble; the 
Lord is a Kosalan, I too am a Kosalan; the Lord is round about 
eighty years of age, I too am round about eighty years of age. It is 
because the Lord is a noble and I am a noble, because the Lord is a 

1 A translation of tkapatayo suggested at K.S. v. 303, n. 1. 

* For the two see S. v. 348 ff., A. iii. 348, 351, 451, v. 139, 143, and DPPN. 

2 mama bhattd mama yana. MA. iii. 354 says mama santakam bhatlam. 

( . . . yanarh . . . ) etesarh, their food (vehicles) is due to me. There is 
jitUe support for Chalmers’ “ who make my carriages.” 



II. 124-125 


On Testimonies to Dliamma 


307 


Kosalan and I am a Kosalan, because the Lord is round about eighty 
years of age and I am round about eighty years of age that I am 
disposed, revered sir, to pay deep respect to the Lord and display 
tokens of friendship. Please, revered sir, I must be going now, I 
am very busy, there is much to be done.” 

“ Do now, sire, that for which you deem it to be the right time.” 

Then King Pasenadi, rising from his seat, having greeted the 
Lord, departed keeping his right side towards him. Soon after 
King Pasenadi had departed, the Lord addressed the monks, saying: 

“ Monks, that is King Pasenadi of Kosala who, having spoken 
testimonies to dliamma , l rising from his seat, is departing. Learn, 
monks, the testimonies to dhamma\ master, [125] monks, the 
testimonies to dhamma ; remember, monks, the testimonies to 
dhamma. Connected with the goal, monks, are the testimonies to 
dhamma , fundamental to the Brahma-faring.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 

Discourse on Testimonies to Dhamma: 

The Ninth 


90. DISCOURSE AT KANNAKATTHALA 

° • 

(Kappakatthalasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Ujuhha 2 * * * * * 8 
in the deer-park at Kanuakatthala. At that time King Pasenadi 


1 MA. iii. 355 explains dkammacetiyani as " words of respect for the 
dhamma . To whichever one of the Three Jewels respect is paid, it is paid to 
all. Therefore, if paid to the Lord, it is paid to dhmrm> and so the Lord 
spoke of * testimonies to dhamma ' ” Cetiya usually means a (sepulchral) 

monument, from a root meaning to pile up, and in this Discourse Chalmers 

renders by “ monuments ” and Neumann by “ Denkmale.” The memorial 

monuments of India are, however, also in the nature of testimony to the 

virtues, etc. of the deceased person in whose honour they are erected. I hope 

the use of this word here does not take us too far from the meaning intended. 

“ Attestations ” might also have been chosen. 

8 Mentioned at D. i. 161. According to MA. iii. 356 it was both a district 
and a town; here the town is meant. 




308 


II. 126-126 


90. Kai^nakatthalasuUa 

of Kosala had arrived at Ujunna on some business or other. Then 
King Pasenadi addressed a certain man, saying: “ Come you, my 
good man, approach the Lord; having approached, in my name 
salute the Lord's feet with your head and ask whether he is well, 
not indisposed, of bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort, and say: 

* Revered sir, King Pasenadi salutes the Lord's feet with his head, 
and asks whether he is well . , . abiding in comfort' ; and then speak 
thus; 1 Revered sir, today after the meal when he has had breakfast, 
King Pasenadi is expecting to come to see the Lord.' ” 

“ Yes, sire," and that man, having answered King Pasenadi in 
assent, approached the Lord ; having approached, having greeted the 
Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance, that man spoke thus to the Lord : “ Revered 
sir, King Pasenadi salutes the Lord's feet with his head, and asks 
whether he is well . . . abiding in comfort. And he speaks thus; 

* Revered sir, today after the meal . . . King Pasenadi is expecting to 
come to see the Lord.' " 

The sisters Soma and Sakula 1 heard: “ Today [126] after the meal 
when he has had breakfast, King Pasenadi is expecting to go to 
see the Lord." Then the sisters Soma and Sakula, having approached 
the place where King Pasenadi was eating, 2 spoke thus: “ Well then, 
sire, in our names salute the Lord's feet with your head and ask 
whether he is well . . . abiding in comfort, saying: * Revered sir, the 
sisters Soma and Sakula salute the Lord’s feet with their heads and 
ask whether he is well , . . abiding in comfort.' " 

Then after the meal when King Pasenadi had eaten his breakfast, 
he approached the Lord; having approached, having greeted the 
Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down 
at a respectful distance, King Pasenadi spoke thus to the Lord: 
“ Revered sir, the sisters Soma and Sakula with their heads salute 
the Lord’s feet and ask whether he is well . . . abiding in com- 
fort." 

“ But how is it, sire, that the sisters Soma and Sakula were not 
able to send another messenger ?” 

“ Revered sir, the sisters Soma and Sakula heard : ‘ Today after 
the meal when he has had breakfast, King Pasenadi is expecting to 
go to see the Lord.' Then, revered sir, the sisters Soma and Sakula, 
having approached me in the place where I was eating, spoke thus: 

1 M A. iii. 356 says that these two sisters were wives of Pasenadi. 

* bhattabhihare, as at 8. i. 82. “ The place where the rice (food) was 

brought,” MA . iii. 350. 



II. 126-127 At Ka^f^kaUhda 309 

* Well then, sire, in our names salute the Lord’s feet with your head 
and ask whether he is well . . . abiding in comfort.’ The sisters Soma 
and Sakula, revered sir, are saluting the Lord’s feet with their heads 
and asking whether he is well, not indisposed, of bodily vigour, 
strong, abiding in comfort.” 

“ May the sisters Soma and Sakula be happy, sire.” 

Then King Pasenadi spoke thus to the Lord: “ I have heard this 
about you, revered sir: ‘ The recluse Gotama speaks thus: There is 
neither a recluse nor a brahman who, all-knowing, all-seeing, can 
claim all-embracing knowledge-and-vision— this situation does not 
exist.* Revered sir, those who speak thus: * The recluse Gotama 
[127] speaks thus: There is neither a recluse nor a brahman . . . this 
situation does not exist * — I hope that these, revered sir, speak what 
was spoken by the Lord, that they do not misrepresent the Lord by 
what is not fact, that they explain dhamtm according to dhamma , 
and that no reasoned thesis gives occasion for contempt I 1 

“ Those, sire, who speak thus: 1 The recluse Gotama speaks thus: 
There is neither a recluse nor a brahman who, all-knowing, all-seeing, 
can claim all-embracing knowledge-and-vision — this situation does 
not exist.’ — these do not speak as I spoke but are misrepresenting 
me with what is not true, with what is not fact.” 

Then King Pasenadi addressed the commander-in-chief, Vi<Ju<J- 
abha, saying: “ Now, who was it, commander-in-chief, that brought 
this subject of conversation into the palace ?” 

“ The brahman Sanjaya of the Akasa clan, sire.” 

Then King Pasenadi summoned a man and said: “ Come you, 
my good man, in my name summon the brahman Sanjaya of the 
Akasa clan, saying: ‘King Pasenadi, revered sir, is summoning 
you.’ ” 

“ Yes, your majesty,” and when this man had answered King 
Pasenadi in assent he approached the brahman Sanjaya of the Akasa 
clan ; and having approached, he spoke thus to the brahman Sanjaya : 
“ King Pasenadi is summoning you, revered sir.” 

Then King Pasenadi spoke thus to the Lord : “ Could it be, revered 

sir, that people might have transferred to quite another topic 
something (originally) said by the Lord in reference to something 
else ? In regard to what, revered sir, does the Lord claim to have 
spoken the words ?” 

“ I, sire, claim to have spoken the words thus: There is neither a 


1 Cf. M. i. 368, ii. 77, 222, 243. 




310 90. Ka^imkaUhcdasutta II. 127-129 

recluse nor a brahman who at one and the same time 1 can know all, 
can see all — this situation does not exist.” 

“ Revered sir, the Lord speaks causally, 2 and it is in reference to 
cause, 2 revered sir, that the Lord says: 1 There is neither a recluse 
nor a brahman [128] who at one and the same time can know all, 
can see all — this situation does not exist/ These, revered sir, are 
the four castes: nobles, brahmans, merchants and workers. Now, 
revered sir, could there be any distinction, any difference, between 
these four castes ?” 

“ These are, sire, the four castes : nobles, brahmans, merchants and 
workers. Among these four castes, sire, two are pointed to as chief : 
the nobles and the brahmans, that is to say in the way of addressing 
them, rising up from one’s seat for them, saluting them with joined 
palms and rendering them service.” 

“ I, revered sir, am not asking the Lord about the here and now; 
revered sir, I am asking the Lord about a future state. These, 
revered sir, are the four castes: nobles, brahmans, merchants and 
workers. Now, revered sir, could there be any distinction, any 
difference between these four castes ?” 

“ Sire, there are these five qualities for striving. 3 What five? 
As to this, sire, a monk has faith . . . with ariyan discrimination 
leading to the complete destruction of anguish. These, sire, are the 
five qualities for striving. These, sire, are the four castes: nobles, 
brahmans, merchants and workers. These might be possessed of the 
five qualities for striving. For a long time that would be for their 
welfare and happiness.” 

“These, revered sir, are the four castes: nobles, brahmans, 
merchants [129] and workers; and these might be possessed of the 
five qualities for striving. Rut, revered sir, might there be among 
them here any distinction, any difference ?” 

“ I, sire, here speak of a divergence in striving. It is as if 4 there 
might be, sire, among elephants or horses or oxen to be tamed two 
elephants, two horses or two oxen that were well tamed, well trained 
and two that were not tamed, not trained. What do you think about 


1 mkideva , MA. iii. 357 says “ who, with one 4 adverting * (of the mind), 
one thought, one * impulsion/ can know and see the whole past, future and 
present.” 

1 heturupam . . . saheturuparh. 

8 As at Jf. ii. 95; see above, p. 282, and fill up the omission in this paragraph 
from there. 

« Cf. M. iii. 130. 



II. 129-130 


311 


At Kanyiakatthala 

this, sire ? Would those two elephants or horses or oxen that were 
to be tamed and that were well tamed, well trained — would these, 
on being tamed, reach tamed capacity, would they, being tamed, 
attain tamed rank ?” 

“ Yes, revered sir.” 

“ But those two elephants or horses or oxen that were to be tamed 
but that were neither tamed nor trained — would these, not being 
tamed, reach tamed capacity, and would they, not being tamed, 
attain tamed rank as do the two elephants or homes or oxen to be 
tamed that were well tamed, well trained ?” 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ Even so, sire, that which may be achieved by faith, by good 
health, by honesty and absence of deceit, by output of energy, by 
wisdom — that one of no faith, of poor health, fraudulent and deceitful, 
lazy, weak in wisdom could attain it — this situation does not exist.” 

“ Severed sir, the Lord speaks causally, and it is in reference to 
cause, revered sir, that the Lord speaks. These, revered sir, are the 
four castes: nobles, brahmans, merchants and workers. These 
might be possessed of the five qualities for striving, and if they made 
the proper efforts would there be between them, revered sir, any 
distinction, any difference ?” 

“ I, sire, here speak of no difference, that is to say in freedom as 
against freedom. It is as though a man, sire, bringing dry sticks 
from a teak tree 1 were to produce a fire and heat were to result. Then 
another man, bringing dry sticks from a sal-tree [ 180 ] . . . another 
man, bringing dry sticks from a mango-tree . . . another man, 
bringing dry sticks from a fig tree were to produce a fire and heat 
were to result. What do you think about this, sire ? Because of the 
different woods used for the fires, would there be any difference in 
what is produced, in flame as against flame, in hue as against hue, 
in brilliance as against brilliance V* 

“ No, revered sir.” 

“ Even so it is, sire, with heat created by energy, produced by 
striving. I do not speak of any difference there, that is in freedom 
as against freedom.” 

“ Revered sir, the Lord speaks causally, and it is in reference to 
cause that the Lord speaks. But, honoured sir, are there devas ?”* 

1 8aka is probably teak, Teetonia grandis, Cf. four (or five) fires at M. ii. 
152, and M . ii. 183. 

7 Cf. M. ii. 212. MA . iii. 359 quotes a passage giving a list of devas — see 
A. i. 210, iii. 287, 313, 316, v. 331, 334. 



312 90. KanrfakaithalasuUa II. 130-131 

“How can you, sire, speak thus: ‘But, revered sir, are there 
devas V ” 

“ Be it that these devas, revered sir, are returners to a state of 
being such or so, 1 or be it that they are not returners to a state of 
being such or so 1” 

“ Sire, whatever devas have been malevolent are returners to a 
state of being such or so; whatever devas have not been malevolent 
are not returners to a state of being such or so ” 

When this had been said, the commander-in-chief, Vi<Ju«Jabha, 
spoke thus to the Lord: “ Revered sir, can those devas that are 
malevolent and are returners to a state of being such or so drive 
away or banish from that place those devas that have not been 
malevolent and are not returners to a state of being such or so ?” 

Then it occurred to the venerable Ananda: “ This Vi<Ju<Jabha, the 
commander-in-chief, is a son of King Pasenadi; I am the Lord’s son. 
This is a time when son might confer with son.” So the venerable 
Ananda addressed Vi<Ju<Jabha, the commander-in-chief, saying: 
“ Well now, commander-in-chief, on this point I will ask you some- 
thing in return. Answer exactly as it seems right to you. What do 
you think about this, commander-in-chief ? As far as the realm of 
King Pasenadi (extends), and there where King Pasenadi [131] holds 
dominion and sway, is King Pasenadi able to drive away or banish 
from that place a recluse or a brahman whether he is meritorious or 
not meritorious, whether he is a Brahma-farer or not a Brahma-farer ? ” 

“ Good sir, as far as the realm of King Pasenadi (extends) and 
there where King Pasenadi holds dominion and sway, King Pasenadi 
is able to drive away or banish from that place a recluse or a brahman 
whether he is meritorious or not, a Brahma-farer or not.” 

“ What do you think about this, commander-in-chief ? As far 
as the realm of King Pasenadi does not (extend), and there where 
King Pasenadi holds no dominion or sway, is King Pasenadi able to 
drive away or banish from that place a recluse or a brahman whether 
he is meritorious or not meritorious, whether he is a Brahma-farer 
or not a Brahma-farer ?” 

“ Good sir, as far as the realm of King Pasenadi does not (extend) 
. . . King Pasenadi is not able to drive away or banish from that place 
a recluse ... or not a Brahma-farer.” 

“ What do you think about, this, commander-in-chief ? Have 
you heard of the devas of the Thirty-Three ?” 


1 iuhatta , being such and such; such or so. 



313 


II. 131-132 At KarvtaJcatthala 

44 Yes, good sir, I have heard of the devas of the Thirty-Three and 
the good King Pasenadi has also heard of the devas of the Thirty- 
Three.” 

44 What do you think about this, commander-in-chief ? Is King 
Pasenadi able to drive away or banish from that place the devas of 
the Thirty-Three ?” 

41 Good sir, King Pasenadi is not even able to see the devas of the 
Thirty-Three. How then could he drive them away or banish them 
from that place V* 

“ Even so, commander-in-chief, those devas that have been malevo- 
lent and are returners to a state of being such or so are not even able 
to see those devas that have not been malevolent and are not 
returners to a state of being such or so. So how could they drive 
them away or banish them from that place ?” 

Then King Pasenadi spoke thus to the Lord : “ What, revered sir, 
is this monk’s name V* 

“ His name is Ananda, sire.” 

“ Bliss 1 indeed, indeed blissful I 1 [132] Revered sir, the venerable 
Ananda speaks causally and it is in reference to cause, revered sir, 
that the venerable Ananda speaks. But now, revered sir, is there 
a Brahma V* 

“ How can you, sire, speak thus: 4 Is there a Brahma V n 

“ Be it that this Brahma, revered sir, is a returner to the state of 
being such or so, or be it that he is not a returner to a state of being 
such or so V * 

4< Sire, whatever Brahma has been malevolent is a returner to a 
state of being such or so ; but whatever Brahma has not been malevo- 
lent is not a returner to a state of being such or so.” 

Then a certain man spoke thus to King Pasenadi: 44 The brahman 
Sanjaya of the Akasa clan has arrived, sire.” Then King Pasenadi 
spoke thus to the brahman Sanjaya of the Akasa clan: 45 Now, who 
was it, brahman, that brought this subject of conversation into the 
palace ?” 

“ VuJuMha, sire, the commander-in-chief." 

“The commander-in-chief, Vidu<Jabha, speaks thus: ‘The 
brahman Sanjaya, sire, of the Akasa clan.’ ” 

Then a certain man spoke thus to King Pasenadi: “ It is time for 
the vehicle, sire.” Then King Pasenadi spoke thus to the Lord: 
“ We, revered sir, questioned the Lord about omniscience; the Lord 


1 ananda . . . anandarupam. 




314 


II. 132-133 


90, Kanqakatthalasutta 

explained omniscience, and because it was pleasing to us and 
approved we are delighted. Revered sir, we questioned the Lord 
about the purity of the four castes; the Lord explained the purity 
of the four castes, and because it was pleasing to us and approved 
we are delighted. Revered sir, we questioned the Lord about the 
devas; the Lord explained the devas, and because it was pleasing to 
us ... we are delighted. Revered sir, we questioned the Lord about 
Brahma; the Lord explained about Brahma, and because it was 
pleasing to us and approved we are delighted. And, revered sir, 
whatever it was we questioned the Lord about, that very thing the 
Lord explained, and because it was pleasing to us and approved we 
are delighted. [133] And now, if it please you, revered sir, we are 
going; we are very busy and there is much to be done/’ 

“ You must do now, sire, that for which you deem it the right 
time.” 

Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, delighted at what the Lord had 
said, having given thanks, rising from his seat, having greeted the 
Lord, departed keeping his right side towards him. 

Discourse at Kannakatthala : 

The Tenth 

The Royal Division: 

The Fourth 



V. THE DIVISION ON BRAHMANS 

(Brahmaoavagga) 




9L DISCOURSE WITH BRAHMAYU 

(Brahmayusutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was walking on tour in 
Videha together with a large Order of monks, with as many as five 
hundred monks. Now at that time the brahman Brahmayu was 
living in Mithila. He was worn, old, full of years, he had lived his 
span and was at the close of his life, a hundred and twenty years of 
age; he was master 1 of the three Vedas , 2 versed in the vocabularies 
and rituals together with the phonology and exegesis 3 and the 
legendary tradition as the fifth; he was learned in idioms, a gram- 
marian, proficient in popular philosophy and the marks of a Great 
Man . 4 * The brahman Brahmayu heard : “ Verily the recluse Gotama , 6 
son of the Sakyans, having gone forth from the Sakyan clan, is 
walking on tour in Videha together with a large Order of monks, 
with as many as five hundred monks. The most lovely report has 
gone abroad thus concerning this revered® Gotama: He is indeed 
Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, endowed with 
knowledge and (right) conduct, Well-farer, knower of the worlds, 
the matchless charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of devas and 
mankind, the Awakened One, the Lord. Having realised through 
his own super-knowledge, he makes known this world together with 
devas including the Maras and the Brahmas; creatures together with 
recluses and brahmans, with devas and mankind. He teaches 


1 This is a stock description of a learned brahman. “ Master,” pdragu , 
is a goer to the beyond in, and so one who has come to finality or culmination. 
Cf. M. ii. 210; 2). i. 88; A. i. 163, 166; Sn . p. 105, ver. 1019/. 

* MA. iii, 362, DA. 247, AA. ii. 261 and SnA. 447 ail give Iru, Y&ju and 
S&ma Vedas (Rig, Yajur and Saman Vedas). 

2 See Dial . i. 106, ». 2, where it is said: u It is quite unnecessary to suppose 

a silent reference to it (the Atharva Veda) here,” as DA. 247= Jf A. iii. 302= 
A A. ii. 261 =SnA. 447 suggest. 

4 See Ambatiha Suttanta (D. i. 87, and see Dial. i. 110, ». 2 and 131, ». 2). 
Also the Lakkhana Suttanta (D. iii. 142), Mahdpaddna Sta. (D. ii. 1 ff.), Mahd - 
purirn Sta . (S. v. 168) and Vassakdra Sta . (A. ii. 35/.). The last two give the 

Buddhist, as against the pre-Buddhist interpretation of the Great Man. See 
also Mhvu. Transin . i. 180/, 

6 This too is a stock clause. • bhavantarn. 

317 



II. 133-134 


318 91. Brahmayusutta 

dhamma that is lovely at the beginning, lovely in the middle and 
lovely at the ending; he explains with the spirit and the letter the 
Brahma-faring completely fulfilled and wholly purified. Good 
indeed is the sight of perfected ones such as this.” 

[134] Now at that time the brahman Brahmayu had the brahman 
youth Uttara as pupil ; he was master of the three Vedas . . . proficient 
in . . . the marks of a Great Man. Then the brahman Brahmayu 
addressed the brahman youth Uttara, saying: “Dear Uttara, this 
recluse Gotama, son of the Sakyans . . . explains with the spirit and 
the letter the Brahma-faring completely fulfilled and wholly 
purified. Good indeed is the sight of perfected ones such as this. 
Come you, dear Uttara, approach the recluse Gotama; having 
approached, find out whether the recluse Gotama is in fact that 
revered Gotama of whom the report has gone abroad or whether he 
is not, and whether the revered Gotama is such a one or not such a one. 
Through you will we know that revered Gotama. So will I, in 
virtue of what you say, find out whether that revered Gotama is in 
fact the revered Gotama of whom the report has gone abroad or 
whether he is not, and whether the revered Gotama is such a one or 
not such a one. Dear Uttara, in our mantras 1 the thirty-two marks 
of the Great Man are traditional. 2 For a Great Man possessed of 
these only two courses 3 are open, not another: If he settles in the 
household state he becomes a king 4 who is a wheel-turner, 5 a dhamma - 
man, 6 a king under dhamma , 7 the ruler of the whole world, one who 

1 manta . MA . iii. 364 explains by veda . Cf. Sn. 1000# On the word 
mantra , as M prayer ” (for the classes of poets, priests and warriors) and as 
“ magical formula or incantation ** (for the masses), see It. N. Dandekar, 
“ Cultural Background of the Veda,” Univ . of Ceylon Review, vol. XI, Nos. 3 
and 4, 1953, p. 141# Whatever a mantra is it is not necessarily a Rig-Vedic 
hymn as such. There are 1,028 of these white, according to Dandekar, there 
are 44 about 10,560 (Rig-Vedic) mantras” 

* dgatani , have come down, been handed down. 

3 gati, bourn, going, procedure. MA. iii. 364 explains by nitthd, goal or 
conclusion. 

4 iii, 365 f he is a king delighting the world with the four wonderful 
aspects of protection (given at D. iii. 232, A . ii. 32). 

* MA. iii. 365, he rolls on the wheel-treasure; if he govern with the four 
wheels of prosperity, sampatli (cf. A . ii. 32), and if he govern others with 
these, he is doing his duty, vatta , for the good of others. 

* dhammika, he walks by dhamma. 

7 dhammardjd . Having succeeded to the throne through dhamma (i.e. 
legitimately, rightly), he is the 4 natural,’ jdta , king. Or, he is dhammika 
because of his 4 rightness,’ dhamma , in regard to the good of others, just as he 
is dhammardjd because of his 4 rightness * in regard to his own good, attahita . 



II. 134-135 With Brahmdyu 319 

brings stability to his realm; and he is possessed of the seven 
Treasures. These seven Treasures of his are the wheel-treasure, 
the elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the 
woman-treasure, the householder-treasure, the adviser-treasure as 
the seventh. He will have more than a thousand sons, valiant, 
built on heroic lines, 1 able to crush opposing armies. He dwells 
conquering this sea-girt land by dhamma* not by stick, not by 
sword. But, if he goes forth from home into homelessness he 
becomes a perfected one, a fully Self- Awakened One, a lifter of the 
world’s veil. 3 Now I, dear Uttara, am an imparter 4 of mantras , you 
are a recipient 4 of mantras. 9 * 

“ Very well, sir,” and the brahman youth Uttara, having answered 
the brahman Brahmayu in assent, rising from his seat, having 
greeted the brahman Brahmayu, keeping his right side towards him, 
set out on tour (to find) the Lord in Videha. [185] Walking on tour, 
he gradually approached the Lord; having approached, he exchanged 
greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a friendly and courteous 
way, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down at 
a respectful distance the brahman youth Uttara looked for the 
thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Lord’s body. And the 
brahman youth Uttara saw all the thirty-two marks of a Great Man 
on the Lord’s body except two. About these two marks of a great 
man he was in doubt, perplexed, uncertain, not satisfied — whether 
what was cloth-hid was sheath-cased and whether the tongue was 
large. Then it occurred to the Lord: “ This brahman youth Uttara 
sees on me all the thirty-two marks of a Great Man except two. 
About these two marks of a Great Man he is in doubt, perplexed, 
uncertain, not satisfied: whether what is cloth-hid is sheath-cased 

1 MA. iii. 366: their bodies are like devas; they are called * heroes ’ because 
of their uttermost valour, as though their bodies were made of energy. 

* MA. iii. 367 identifies dhamma with alia here, the moral conduct of 
keeping the five precepts. 

1 MA. iii. 367 shows that these three attainments follow one from another, 

YmUmMda, the lifter of the Yeil, refers to remorng the seven darkness 

of the defilements: attachment, hatred, confusion, pride, false views, ignorance 
and wrong-doing. 

4 data . . • papiggahetd , as at D. i. 89. For the following note I am in- 
debted to Mr. P. Mehta: “ The guru conveys or imparts a new mantra when he 
sees the pupil is ready for it. When the pupil sounds (pronounces) it correctly 
then the guru teaches him the meaning. Correct sounding influences the 
mental receptivity of the pupil and induces a state of consciousness which is 
most appropriate for learning the meaning. The * mantra ’ as sound is 
imparted or conveyed; the 1 mantra 1 as meaning or significance is taught.” 



320 91. Brahmayumtta II. 135-136 

and whether my tongue is large.” Then the Lord contrived such a 
contrivance of psychic power 1 that the brahman youth Uttara saw 
that that which the Lord had cloth-hid was sheath-cased. Then the 
Lord, having put out his tongue, stroked it backwards and forwards 
over both his ears and he stroked it backwards and forwards over 
both his nostrils and he covered the whole dome of his forehead with 
his tongue.* 

Then it occurred to the brahman youth Uttara: “The recluse 
Gotama is possessed of the thirty-two marks of a Great Man. 
Suppose I were to follow the recluse Gotama closely so as to watch 
his conduct V* Then for seven months the brahman youth Uttara, 
like a constant shadow, 8 followed the Lord closely. After the lapse 
of the seven months the brahman youth Uttara set out on tour for 
Mithila in Videha; walking on tour he gradually approached Mithila 
and the brahman Brahmayu ; having approached and having greeted 
the brahman Brahmayu, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
Brahmayu the brahman spoke thus to the brahman youth Uttara as 
he was sitting down at a respectful distance : “ I suppose, dear Uttara, 
that the report spread abroad about the revered Gotama was truly 
so [136] and not otherwise ? I suppose that the revered Gotama is 
such a one and not of another kind V 9 

“ Sir, the report spread abroad about the revered Gotama was 
truly so and not otherwise ; this revered Gotama is such a one and not 
of another kind. And this revered Gotama is possessed of the 
thirty-two marks of a Great Man: 4 

The revered Gotama has feet with a level tread 5 — the good Gotama, 
a Great Man, has this mark of a Great Man. 

On the soles of the good Gotama’s feet wheels appear with a 
thousand spokes, with rims and hubs, in every way complete. 

1 Cf. Miln. 167-169. * Cf. Sn. 1022. 

8 As at Dhp. 2, Tkag . 1041-1043, etc. 

4 For more notes on the thirty -two marks or signs, see Dial. il. 13 ff. and 
Mhvu. Translation, i. 180^., where the order in which the marks are given 
differs now and again from the M. version. See also Lamotte, MppL i. 
285-288, notes, where it is said that these 32 marks ornament the bodies both 
of Buddhas and of wheel-turning kings, and again, either all or some of the 
marks adorn the bodies of some other persons besides. Some of these men 
and women are known to the Pali Canon, for example the brahman Bavarin, 
who had three of the marks (Sn. 1022). Like Brahmayu he was 120 years 
old (Sn. 1019), Cf. also Kvu. 283 where the point of controversy is whether 
a bodhisatta is fully or partially possessed of the 32 marks. 

1 He puts the whole foot down on the ground with a single movement — 
neither the big toe first nor the heel. 



II. 136 With Brakmdyu 321 

The revered Gotama has projecting heels. 

The revered Gotama has long fingers (and toes ). 1 

The revered Gotama has soft and tender hands and feet. 

The revered Gotama has (the fingers and toes) of his hands and 
feet evenly spaced.* 

The revered Gotama has ankles that are midway in the leg . 3 

The revered Gotama has legs like (those of) antelopes . 4 

The revered Gotama, while standing erect and not bending, can 
stroke and rub his knees with the palms of both hands. 

The revered Gotama has sheath-cased what is cloth-hid. 

The revered Gotama is the colour of gold , 6 

The revered Gotama has a golden 6 coloured skin, a smooth 
complexion. Because of his smooth complexion no dust or dirt 
adheres to his body. 

The revered Gotama has hairs that are separate. The separate 
hairs grow (one) to each pore. 

The revered Gotama has hairs that grow upward. The upward 
growing hairs are dark blue, the colour of collyrium, curling in rings, 
curling to the right. 

The revered Gotama has a divinely straight body . 7 

The revered Gotama has the seven convex surfaces . 8 


1 dighanguli . Anguli usually mean only the fingers. MA. iii. 376 includes 
the toes as well, and says that the ahgvli are thick at the roots and taper off 
gradually to slender points. 

1 jalahatthapado . See “ The Webbed Finger of the Buddha,’ 1 by A. K. 
Coomaraswamy, I HQ. VII, 1931, p. 20. It is better to take this as does 
Buddhaghosa at MA. iii. 376, etc., as; “ the four fingers of the Tathagata’s 
hands and the five toes of his feet are of an equal measure ” — spaced as evenly 
apart (with no swellings) as is the “ netting ” or network, jata t of a particular 
kind of latticed window when made by a skilled carpenter. A person whose 
fingers are “ webbed ” (%.€. grown together) like a snake’s hood is not even 
fit to go forth (Vin. i. 71, quoted MA. iii. 376). So how could a “ webbed 
finger ” be a mark of a Great Man T “ With hands and feet like a net ” 
(Dial. ii. 14) explains nothing. 

J Not towards the heels as in other people, MA. iii. 377. The Pali word is 

usmnkhapddo. Of. also BH8D. s.v. iicckankha. 

4 i.e. with flesh all round, not in a lump at one side. The notion is “ straight- 
limbed.” Of. Sn. 165; 8. i. 16. 

4 The traditbnal colour-symbol for immortality; suvanna . 

4 Jcancana here ; bright, shining. 

7 A straight tall body, like Brahma’s. Most creatures bend at the 
shoulders, hips and knees; but the Tathagata, rising up tall, is like a high 
golden gateway in a city of the devas, MA. iii. 378. 

• mttussada , omitted in Chalmers’ text, but referred to in this textual 




322 91. BrahmayusuUa II. 136-137 

The revered Gotama has a body the front part of which is like a 
lion’s. 1 

The revered Gotama has no hollow between his shoulders.* 

The revered Gotama has the symmetrical proportions of a banyan 
tree — as is the height of his body so is the length of his arms when 
stretched out ; as is the length of his arms when stretched out so is the 
height of his body. 

The revered Gotama has a bust that is evenly rounded. 

The revered Gotama has an exquisite sense of taste. 

The revered Gotama has jaws like a lion’s. 

[137] The revered Gotama has forty teeth. 8 

The revered Gotama has even teeth. 

The revered Gotama has teeth without spaces between them. 

The revered Gotama has very lustrous eye-teeth. 

The revered Gotama has a long tongue. 

The revered Gotama has a voice like Brahma’s; 4 he speaks like 
a karamka bird.® 

The revered Gotama has eyes of an intense blue. 

The revered Gotama has eyelashes like a cow’s. 

The hair that the revered Gotama has growing between the 
eyebrows is white and soft like cotton-down. 

The revered Gotama has a head shaped like a (royal) turban. 6 
The good Gotama, a Great Man, has also this mark of a Great Man. 7 
The revered Gotama is possessed of these thirty-two marks of a 
Great Man. 

If the revered Gotama is walking he leads off with his right foot; 
he does not put the foot too far (forward), he does not place the foot 
too short; he does not walk too quickly; he does not walk too slowly; 
he does not walk knocking knee against knee or ankle against ankle; 

1 le. curving, paripunna. Although the back portion of a lion's body 
does not curve, the whole of the Tathagata’s body curves, MA. iii. 379. 

* From the small of the back up to the shoulders, the fleshy covering is 
like a smooth golden slab. 

* twenty in each jaw, MA . iii. 381. 

4 brahmassara , a sublime voice. It is like a Great Brahma’s, MA. iii. 382. 
See Kvu . 467. 

8 Famed for its sweet note, the Indian cuckoo. 

* J.e., absolutely symmetrical. 

7 No doubt this refrain should occur after the naming of each mark; while 
omitted in our text it occurs in D. ii. 17-19. 


position at MA. iii. 378 as meaning that on the four limbs, on both shoulders 
and on the back there is a protuberance of flesh. 





II. 137-138 With Brahmayu 323 

while he is waiting he does not bend his thighs up, he does not bend 
his thighs down, he does not bend his thighs in, he does not bend his 
thighs out. 1 As the revered Gotama walks he moves only with the 
lower part of his body and does not walk with his (full) bodily 
strength.® When he is looking around, the revered Gotama looks 
round with his whole body, 3 he does not look up, he does not look 
down, and he does not walk without observing, 4 for he looks (ahead) 
a plough’s length; 5 further than that his knowledge and insight 
become unobstructed. 6 

On entering into a house 7 he does not bend his body up, he does 
not bend his body down, he does not bend his body in, [138] he does 
not bend his body out. He turns round not too far from his seat, 
not too near it, and he does not sit down on the seat clutching hold 
of it with his hand, nor does he fling his body (in a slovenly way 8 ) 
on to the seat.® When he is seated in a house he does not fall into 
unseemly behaviour with his hands, 10 he does not fall into unseemly 

1 These words for “ bending up, down, in, out,” unndmeti , ondmeli, sauna* 
meti , vinameti, occur several times later in this Discourse. Cf. also Miln. 117. 

* MA. iii. 388, sweat pours from the body if one keeps on flinging out one’s 
arms. 

* This is called the “ elephant look,” M. i. 337. Bee MA, ii. 420, iii 133 (the 
latter referred to at MA, iii. 388). 

4 na ca vipekkhamdno gacchati. The passage is somewhat corrupt. MA. 
iii. 388: he walks without looking from this side to that as though not seeing 
the elephants, horses, etc. So this phrase may mean: “he walks without 
staring (about).” On the other hand, the next phrase: yugamattan capekkhati, 
seems to develop the idea of “ not without observing.” In walking as in the 
other “ postures,” there is to be not only mindfulness but also clear conscious- 
ness. 

5 Cf. Sn. 410. MA. iii. 388 says he fixes his eyes as little as nine vidatthi 
(ahead) when he is walking. 

6 anavatam , as at 8 . i. 62. “Irresistible” at K.S . i. 76. MA. iii. 388: 
“ It could not be said that he does not see beyond a plough’s length, since no 
wall or door or bush or creeper is able to obstruct him. Thus because of his 
unobstructed (all-pervading, anavarana) knowledge, various thousands of 

groups of world-systems are reckoned as one,” i.e. ho can see and know them 

all together and all at once, with * open,’ unhindered, andvafa , insights. 

7 Here, according to MA. iii. 388 antaraghara means from the threshold, 
ummara , of a house, in distinction to the indalchila which, at Ftn. iv. 160, is 
identified with the ummara . The indakhila is a (village) post. 

8 pakkhipati. MA. iii. 389, he does not first settle either his lower or upper 
limbs, but sits down sanikam , slowly, gently or gradually. 

* See the Sekhiyas on walking and sitting “ amid houses,” Yin. iv. 186 ff.> 199. 

10 He does not twirl round his bowl or throw out a drop of water or split 

the leaf cover of a fly-whisk or fan. 



324 91. BraJirndywuUa II. 138-139 

behaviour with his feet; 1 he does not sit down crossing knee over 
knee or ankle over ankle, nor does he sit down holding his jaw in 
his hand. When he is seated in a house he is not afraid, does not 
tremble, shake or quiver — and so is the revered Gotama when he is 
sitting in a house unafraid, untrembling, not shaking, not quivering, 
unruffled, intent on aloofness. 

When he is receiving water for the bowl he does not turn the bowl 
up, he does not turn the bowl down, he does not turn the bowl inwards, 
he does not turn the bowl outwards ; he receives neither too little nor 
too much water for the bowl. He washes the bowl without making 
it clatter, 2 he washes the bowl without twirling it round; not until 
he has put the bowl down on the ground does he wash his hands ; by 
the time the hands are washed the bowl is washed; by the time the 
bowl is washed the hands are washed. He throws away the water 
for the bowl not too far, not too near, and without scattering it. 

When he is receiving boiled rice, he does not turn the bowl up, 
he does not turn the bowl down, he does not turn the bowl inwards, 
he does not turn the bowl outwards; he receives neither too little nor 
too much boiled rice. The revered Gotama eats the proper propor- 
tion of curry (to rice 8 ) and he does not neglect (the rice) with each 
mouthful of curry. The revered Gotama swallows each mouthful 
only after having turned it round two or three times in his mouth ; 
there is not a single grain of boiled rice that enters his body without 
having been broken up, and not a single grain of boiled rice remains 
in his mouth before he proceeds to the (next) mouthful. The revered 
Gotama eats food experiencing its flavour but not experiencing greed 
for the flavour. The revered Gotama eats food that is possessed of 
the eight characteristics 4 but not for fun or indulgence or personal 
charm or beautification, but just enough for the support of his body 
and keeping it going, for keeping it unharmed, for furthering the 
Brahma-faring, thinking: [139] * Thus will I crush out an old feeling 
and not allow a new feeling to arise, and then there will be subsistence 
for me and blamelessness and abiding in comfort.’ 6 

When he has eaten and is accepting water for the bowl, he does not 

1 He does not grind them on the ground. 

* na JchulukhtUukaraka, not commented upon in MA. Chalmers trans- 
lates: 44 he does not swish the water about Neumann: 44 nhne zu pl&tschen.” 
See PED. s.v. gala, and cf. BHSD. s.v. khuruJchuru -. 

3 Three portions of rice to one of cuny. 

4 MA. iii. 392 refers to M. Sta. 2 and Vism. 31. 

8 As at M . i. 355, ii. 10, and also at e.g. S . iv. 104, A. iii. 388, iv. 167; 
and see Vism. 31. 



II. 139-140 With Brahmdyu 325 

turn the bowl up . . . down . * . inwards outwards. He receives 

neither too little nor too much water for the bowl. He washes the 
bowl without making it clatter (as above in last 'paragraph but one) 
... He throws away the water for the bowl not too far, not too near, 
and without scattering it. When he has eaten, he places the bowl 
on the ground, not too far, not too near, for he is not without 
concern for the bowl 1 yet he is not over-protective of the bowl. 
When he has eaten, he sits silent for a moment, but he does not let 
pass the time for giving thanks. When he has eaten, he gives thanks. 
He does not decry that meal, he does not hope for another meal; 
on the contrary he delights, rouses, inspires, gladdens that assembly 
with talk on dhamma. When he has delighted ... gladdened that 
assembly with talk on dhamma , rising from his seat, he departs. He 
does not walk too quickly, he does not walk too slowly, he does not 
walk (as if) anxious to get free (of that assembly). 2 

The revered Gotama’s robe is not pulled up too high on his body, 
it is not pulled down too low 3 ; and neither does it stick to his body, 4 
nor is it drawn away from his body, 5 and neither does the wind blow 
the revered Gotama’s robe about on his body, 8 nor do dust and dirt 
cling to the revered Gotama’s body. 

When he has gone to a monastery he sits down on an appointed 
seat and while sitting down he cleanses his feet 7 — but the revered 
Gotama does not live intent on the practice of beautifying his feet. 
When he has cleansed his feet he sits down cross-legged, holding the 
body erect and arousing mindfulness in front of him. He does not 
strive after hurt of self, he does not strive after hurt of others, he 
does not strive after hurt of both. 8 The revered Gotama sits down 
striving only after weal of self, weal of others, weal of both, weal of the 
whole world. [140] When, in a monastery, he is teaching dhamma 
in an assembly, he does not exalt that assembly, he does not dis- 
parage that assembly; on the contrary he delights, rouses, inspires, 

1 Not indifferent to it and taking care of it — not like someone who once 

he has put his bowl on a stand (for bowls) does not pour water into it but 

watches indifferently while dust falls into it. 

* He does not hurry away, MA. iii. 393. 

3 Not as high as his jaw or as low as his ankles, MA. iii. 393. 

4 Because he does not sweat as other people do. 

4 It does not stand free like a khali cloak. 

6 Reading kayasmim with Siamese instead of text’s Jcdyamha . The wind 
cannot make his robe stir, MA. iii. 393. 

7 As at Vin. i. 9. 

8 Cf. M . i. 414, iii. 23; A. i. 157; 8. iv . 339. 



326 


II. 140-141 


91. Brahmdyusutta 

gladdens that assembly with talk on dhamma . The sound that issues 
from the revered Gotama’s mouth 1 is possessed of eight charac- 
teristics: it is distinct and intelligible and sweet and audible and 
fluent 2 and clear and deep and resonant. Wherefore when the 
revered Gotama instructs an assembly by voice the sound does 
not carry beyond that assembly. These, after being delighted 
. . . gladdened by the revered Gotama with talk on dhamma , 
rising from their seats, depart reluctantly, keeping their gaze on him. 

We, sir, have seen that revered Gotama walking, we have seen him 
standing still, we have seen him sitting silent within a house, we have 
seen him eating in a house, we have seen him sitting silent after he 
has eaten, we have seen him giving thanks after he has eaten, we 
have seen him going to a monastery, we have seen him sitting silent 
in a monastery, we have seen him in a monastery teaching dhamma 
in an assembly. This revered Gotama is like this and like that and 
even more so.” 3 

When this had been said, Brahmayu the brahman, rising from his 
seat, having arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, having 
saluted the Lord with joined palms, three times uttered this solemn 
utterance: “ Praise to that Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened 
One . . . Praise to that Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One. 
Perhaps somewhere, sometime we might meet this revered Gotama, 
perhaps there might be some conversation between us.” 

Then the Lord, walking on tour in Videha, in due course arrived at 
Mithila. While he was there the Lord stayed near Mithila in 
Makhadeva’s Mango Grove. Brahmans and householders of 
Mithila heard : “ Verily the recluse Gotama, [141] son of the Sakyans, 
having gone forth from the Sakyan clan, is walking on tour in Videha 
together with a large Order of monks, with as many as five hundred 
monks. The most lovely report has gone abroad thus concerning 
the revered Gotama . . . (as in the first paragraph ) . . . Good indeed is 
the sight of perfected ones such as this.” Then the brahmans and 
householders of Mithila approached the Lord: some, having ap- 
proached and having greeted the Lord, sat down at a respectful 
distance; some, after they had exchanged greetings with the Lord 
and had conversed in a friendly and courteous way, sat down at a 


1 Cf. D. ii. 211, 227 of Brahma Sanamkumara’s voice. 

2 bindu. MA » iii. 394 gives sampindiia, brought together, connected. 

8 ” His excellent virtues that I have not spoken of are more than those 
I have spoken of— like the great earth, the great ocean, unending, boundless, 
wide as the sky,” MA. iii. 395. 



II. 141-142 


327 


With Brahmayu 

respectful distance; some, after saluting tlie Lord with joined palms, 
sat down at a respectful distance; some, having made known to the 
Lord the name of their clan, sat down at a respectful distance; 
some, becoming silent, sat down at a respectful distance. 

The brahman Brahmayu heard; “Verily the recluse Gotama, 
son of the Sakyans, gone forth from the Sakyan clan, has arrived at 
Mithila and is staying near Mithila in Makhadeva’s Mango Grove.” 
Then Brahmayu the brahman together with a number of brahman 
youths approached Makhadeva’s Mango Grove. When Brahmayu 
the brahman was near the Mango Grove it occurred to him: “ It is 
not suitable in me that I should approach to see the recluse Gotama 
without being announced first.” So Brahmayu the brahman 
addressed a certain brahman youth, saying; “ Come you, brahman 
youth, approach the recluse Gotama; having approached, in my 
name ask the recluse Gotama whether he is well, not indisposed, of 
bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort, saying: ‘ Good Gotama, 
Brahmayu the brahman is asking whether the revered Gotama is 
well, not indisposed, of bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort * ; 
and then speak thus: ‘ Good Gotama, Brahmayu the brahman is 
worn, old, full of years, he has lived his span and is at the close of his 
life, a hundred and twenty years of age; he is master of the three 
Vedas, versed in the vocabularies and rituals together with the 
phonology and exegesis and the legendary tradition as the fifth; he 
is learned in idioms, a grammarian, proficient in popular philosophy 
and the marks of a Great Man. Of all the brahmans and house- 
holders, sir, who live in Mithila, Brahmayu the brahman is pointed 
to as chief in respect of wealth, Brahmayu the brahman is pointed 
to as chief in respect of mantras , [142] Brahmayu the brahman is 
pointed to as chief in respect of longevity as well as of renown. 
He is anxious to see the good Gotama.” 

“ Very well, sir,” and the brahman youth, having answered the 
brahman Brahmayu in assent, approached the Lord; having 
approached, he exchanged greetings with the Lord, and having 
conversed in a friendly and courteous Way, ha Stood ftt a TBSpectflll 
distance. As he was standing at a respectful distance, the brahman 
youth spoke thus to the Lord; “Good Gotama, the brahman 
Brahmayu is asking whether the revered Gotama is well, not in- 
disposed, of bodily vigour, strong, abiding in comfort. The brahman 
Brahmayu, good Gotama, is worn, old, full of years . . . proficient in 
popular philosophy and the marks of a Great Man. Of all the 
brahmans and householders who live in Mithila, Brahmayu the 



328 


II. 142-143 


91. Brahmdyusutta 

brahman is pointed to as chief in respect of wealth ... in repect of 
mantras ... in respect of longevity as well as of renown. He is 
anxious to see the good Gotama.” 

“ Brahmayu the brahman must now do that for which he deems 
it the right time, brahman youth.” 

Then that brahman youth approached Brahmayu the brahman; 
having approached, he spoke thus to Brahmayu the brahman; 
“ Permission has been given, 1 revered sir, by the recluse Gotama. 
Revered sir, you may now do that for which you deem it the right 
time.” 

Then Brahmayu the brahman approached the Lord. His assembly 
saw the brahman Brahmayu coming in the distance. Having seen 
him, they, standing each at his own side, 2 made room for him because 
he was well known and renowned. Then Brahmayu the brahman 
spoke thus to that assembly: “ No, good sirs, you sit down each on 
your own seat, I will sit here near the recluse Gotama.” Then 
Brahmayu the brahman approached the Lord; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord; having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. 
As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, Brahmayu the 
brahman [143] looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the 
Lord’s body. And Brahmayu the brahman saw all the thirty-two 
marks of a Great Man on the Lord’s body except two. About these 
two marks of a Great Man he was in doubt, perplexed, uncertain, 
not satisfied — whether what was cloth-hid was sheath-cased and 
whether the tongue was large. Then Brahmayu the brahman 
addressed the Lord in verses : 

“ Of these thirty-two marks of a Great Man of which I have heard 

There are two that I do not see on your body, Gotama. 

I wonder whether what is cloth-hid is sheath-cased, Supreme 
of men ? 

Or is it female ? I wonder whether the tongue is not short ? 

I wonder whether you have a long tongue. So that I might 
know this, 

Put forth this tongue, dispel our doubt, Seer. 

For welfare here and now, and for bliss in a future state 

We ask for permission (to see) that which we long (to know).” 

1 katavakasa. 

2 oram atha or oram attha . MA . iii. 396 says: u getting up quickly, having 
divided into two, they made room N for him.” See JPTS. y 1887, p. 164 ff. 




II. 143-144 With Brahmayu 329 

Then it occurred to the Lord: “ This brahman Brahmayu sees on 
me all the thirty-two marks of a Great Man except two. About 
these two marks of a Great Man he is in doubt, perplexed, uncertain, 
not satisfied— whether what is cloth-hid is sheath-cased and whether 
my tongue is large.” Then the Lord contrived such a contrivance 
of psychic power that the brahman Brahmayu saw that that which 
the Lord had cloth-hid was sheath-cased. Then the Lord, having 
put out his tongue, stroked it backwards and forwards over both his 
ears and he stroked it backwards and forwards over both his nostrils 
and he covered the whole dome of his forehead with his tongue. 

Then the Lord responded in verses to the brahman Brahmayu: 

“ Those thirty-two marks of a Great Man of which you have 
heard 

Are all on my body. Do not you doubt them, brahman. 

What 1 is to be known is known by me, and to be developed is 
developed, 

What is to be got rid of has been got rid of— therefore, brahman, 
am I Awake. 2 

[144] For welfare here and now and for bliss in a future state 

Do ask for permission (to see) that which you long (to know).” 

Then it occurred to the brahman Brahmayu: “ Permission has 
been given me by the recluse Gotama. Suppose I were to ask the 
recluse Gotama about the goal either of the here and now or of a 
future state V 9 But then it occurred to the brahman Brahmayu: 
“ I myself am skilled in the goals of the here and now, and others ask 
me about the goal of the here and now. Suppose I were to ask the 
recluse Gotama simply about the goal of a future state ?” Then 
Brahmayu the brahman addressed the Lord in verses : 

“ How is one a brahman ? How does one become master 
of knowledge ? 

How is one a threefold knowledge-man ? Who is called 
learned ? 

How is one perfected ? How does one become whole ? 

And how is one a sage ? Who is called Awake ?” 

Then the Lord responded in verses to the brahman Brahmayu: 

1 Sn. 558; and below, p. 337. This and the next line are quoted at VinA. 
i. 115; It A. 149; UdA . 84; PtsA . i. 215; Vism. 201, 

2 tasmd buddho ’ smi ; also below, p. 337— Sn. 558, A . ii. 39; cf. M . i. 171, 
Vin , i. 8. 



330 91. Brahmayumtta II. 144-145 

“ Who knows his former habitations and sees heaven and the 
sorrowful ways, 

Who has attained destruction of births, 1 * accomplished by super- 
knowledge, a Sage is he. 

Who knows his mind is quite pure, freed from every attachment, 

Who has got rid of birth and dying, in the Brahma-faring Whole 
is he.* 

Who is master of all states of mind, 3 such a one Awake is called.” 

When this had been said, Brahmayu the brahman, rising from his 
seat, arranging his upper robe over one shoulder, having inclined his 
head to the Lord’s feet, kissed the Lord’s feet on all sides with his 
mouth and stroked them on all sides with his hands, and he made 
known his (own) name; 4 * “ I, good Gotama, am Brahmayu, the brah- 
man.” Then that company was filled with wonder and marvel, and 
said : “ Indeed it is wonderfhl, indeed it is marvellous how great is the 
psychic power and the majesty of the recluse in virtue of which this 
Brahmayu the brahman, well known and renowned, pays such deep 
respect.” 

Then the Lord spoke thus to Brahmayu the brahman; [145] 
“ Enough, brahman, rise up ; do sit down on your own seat since your 
mind was pleased with me.” Then the brahman Brahmayu, having 
risen up, sat down on his own seat. Then the Lord gave a talk 
to Brahmayu the brahman on various topics; 6 talk on giving, talk on 
moral habit, talk on heaven; he explained the peril, the vanity, the 
depravity of the pleasures of the senses, the advantage in renouncing 
them. When the Lord knew that the mind of Brahmayu the brah- 
man was ready, malleable, devoid of the hindrances, uplifted, pleased, 
then he explained to him that teaching on dhamma that the Awakened 
Ones have themselves discovered: anguish, uprising, stopping, the 
Way. And as a clean cloth without black specks will easily take dye, 
even so as Brahmayu the brahman was (sitting) on that very seat 
did dhamma-vision, dustless and stainless, arise in him: that “ what- 
ever is liable to origination all that is liable to stopping.” Then 
Brahmayu the brahman, having seen dhamma , attained dhamma , 
known dhamma , plunged into dhamma , having crossed over doubt, 

1 Iti. p. 100; A. i. 165; 8. i. 167; Thlg. 63 /. Cf. Dhp. 423; Sn. 647, of a 

brahman. 

* This line also occurs at A. ii. 23. s See also A. ii. 23. 

4 .4* at M. ii. 120. Cf. 8. L 178, 193. See Intr. p. xxv. above. 

4 Cf. Yin . i. 15, ii. 155 ff.* t D. i. 110; M. i. 379, etc. 



II. 145-146 With Brahmayu 331 

put away uncertainty and attained without another’s help to full 
confidence in the Teacher’s instruction, spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ It is excellent, good Gotama; it is excellent, good Gotama. 
Even, good Gotama, as one might set upright what had been upset, 
or disclose what w r as covered, or show the way to one who had 
gone astray, or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness thinking that 
those with vision might see material shapes, even so is dhamma made 
clear in many a figure by the good Gotama. So I am going to the 
revered Gotama (for refuge) 1 and to dhamma and to the Order of 
monks. May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple going 
for refuge from this day forth for as long as life lasts. And may the 
revered Gotama consent to a meal with me on the morrow together 
with the Order of monks.” 

The Lord consented by becoming silent. Then Brahmayu the 
brahman, having understood the Lord’s consent, rising up from his 
seat, having greeted the Lord, departed keeping his right side towards 
him. Then the brahman Brahmayu having had sumptuous foods, 
solid and soft, prepared in his own dwelling towards the end of that 
night, had the time announced to the Lord, saying : “ It is time, good 
Gotama, the meal is ready.” [146] Then the Lord, having dressed 
in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, approached the dwelling of 
Brahmayu the brahman; having approached, he sat down on the 
appointed seat together with the Order of monks. Then did 
Brahmayu the brahman for seven days with his own hand serve and 
satisfy the Order of monks with the Awakened One at its head with 
sumptuous foods, solid and soft. Then at the end of the seven days 
the Lord set out on tour in Videha. 

Not long after the Lord had set out Brahmayu the brahman 
passed away. Then a number of monks approached the Lord; 
having approached, having greeted the Lord, they sat down at a 
respectful distance. As they were sifting down at a respectful 
distance, these monks spoke thus to the Lord: “ Revered sir, 
Brahmayu the brahman has passed away. What is his bourn, 
what his future state ?” 

“ Clever, 2 monks, was the brahman Brahmayu; he followed after 
dhamma according to various parts of dhamma , 3 and he did not 


1 saranam not in Chalmers’ text; probably omitted by an oversight. 

* For this paragraph c/. M. iii. 247, 270; S. iv. 63, v. 346; Ud . 8, 60. In 
all these passages other men are concerned, and other bourns. 

8 paccapddi dhammassd nudhammam . MA . iii. 398 says: “ In this Discourse 
dhamma means the Way of perfection ( arahaitamagga ); anudhamma means 




332 91. BrdhmayusuUa II. 146 Sn. 102-103 

annoy me 1 with questionings about dhamma. Monks, Brahmayu the 
brahman, by the complete destruction of the five fetters binding to 
this lower (shore), is of spontaneous uprising, one who attains 
nibbana there, not liable to return from that world.” 

Thus spoke the Lord. Delighted, these monks rejoiced in what 
the Lord had said. 


Discourse with Brahmayu: 
The First 


92. DISCOURSE WITH SELA 

(Selasutta) 2 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord walking on tour among the 
people of Anguttarapa, 3 together with a large Order of monks, 
[Sw. 103] with twelve hundred and fifty monks, arrived at the market 
town called Apana belonging to the people of Anguttarapa. Keniya 
the matted hair ascetic 4 heard: “ Verily the recluse Gotama, son of 
the Sakyans, having gone forth from the Sakyan clan, walking on 
tour among the people of Anguttarapa together with a large Order 
of monks, with twelve hundred and fifty monks, has reached Apana. 

1 M. text reads navamarh vihesesi, instead of na ca mam, as in two variant 
readings of the text, in the parallel contexts, and at MA. iii. 398. This 
navamam has misled Chalmers, although it might be argued that his “ difficulty 
with the ninth stage ” (of meditation ?) is borne out to some extent by the 
fact that Brahmayu is not said to have achieved arahantship, being spoken 
of in words descriptive only of a non-returner. But this is far-fetched, and 
nothing is said in this Discourse about Brahmayu attempting any of the 
M stages ” in meditation or of becoming proficient in them. 

1 The text of this Sutta is not given in M. ii. “ as it is identical with that 
of the same name in the Suttanipata, printed at p. 99 of Prof. Fausb oil’s 
edition for the P.T.S.” This Sutta is also printed at p. 102 ff. of Dines 
Andersen and Helmer Smith’s edn. of the Sn., likewise a P.T.S. publication. 
Cf. Vin. i. 245 ff., D. i. 87 jfif. 

3 As in M . Sta. 54. 4 For notes and references see B.D. iv. 336, n. 10. 


the three lower Ways and the fruits of recluseship. The meaning is that he 
acquired these in successive order.” 



Sn . 103-104 


With Sela 


333 


The most lovely report has gone abroad thus concerning this revered 
Gotama . . } Good indeed is the sight of perfected ones such as 
this*” Then Keniya the matted hair ascetic approached the Lord; 
having approached, he exchanged greetings with the Lord; having 
conversed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As the matted hair ascetic Keniya was sitting down at a 
respectful distance the Lord delighted, roused, inspired, gladdened 
him with talk on dhamma. Then Keniya the matted hair ascetic, 
delighted . . . gladdened by the Lord with talk on dhamma , spoke 
thus to the Lord: “ May the good Gotama together with the Order 
of monks consent to a meal with me on the morrow.” 1 2 When this 
had been said, the Lord spoke thus to Keniya the matted hair 
ascetic : 

“ But, Keniya, great [$w. 104] is the Order of monks, twelve 
hundred and fifty monks, and you are favourably disposed towards 3 
the brahmans.” And a second time did Keniya the matted hair 
ascetic speak thus to the Lord: 

“ Although, good Gotama, the Order of monks is large, twelve 
hundred and fifty monks, and although I am favourably disposed 
towards the brahmans, (yet) may the good Gotama consent to a 
meal with me on the morrow together with the Order of monks.” 
And a second time did the Lord speak thus to Keniya the matted 
hair ascetic : 

44 But, Keniya, great is the Order of monks, twelve hundred and 
fifty monks, and you are favourably disposed towards the brahmans.” 
And a third time did Keniya the matted hair ascetic speak thus to the 
Lord: 

“ Although, good Gotama, the Order of monks is large, twelve 
hundred and fifty monks, and although I am favourably disposed 
towards the brahmans, (yet) may the good Gotama consent to a 
meal with me on the morrow together with the Order of monks.” 
The Lord consented by becoming silent. Then Keniya the matted 
hair ascetic, having understood the Lord’s consent, rising from his 
seat, approached his own hermitage ; having approached, ha addressed 
his friends and acquaintances, his kith and kin, saying: “ Let my 
good friends and acquaintances, my kith and kin, hear that the 
recluse Gotama together with the Order of monks has been invited 

1 As in Sta. 91 (M. ii. 133). 

2 Cf. Vin. i. 240 for Keniya's invitation to a meal. 

8 abhippasanna, with the loc. The meaning really amounts to; being well 
enough pleased with to believe in; feeling very serene with. 



92. Selasuita 


334 


Sn. 104-106 


by me for a meal on the morrow. So would you do personal service 
for me V * 

“ Yes, good sir,” and when the friends and acquaintances, the kith 
and kin of Keniya the matted hair ascetic had answered him in 
assent, some dug pits (for the fire), some chopped sticks, some 
washed pots, some put out jars of water, and some got ready the 
seats, while Keniya himself prepared a pavilion. 1 

Now at that time Sela the brahman was living in Apana. [Sn. 105] 
He was master of the three Vedas, 2 versed in the vocabularies and 
the rituals together with the phonology and exegesis and the legend- 
ary tradition as the fifth ; he was learned in idioms, a grammarian, 
proficient in popular philosophy and the marks of a Great Man. 
He instructed three hundred brahman youths in mantras . At that 
time Keniya the matted hair ascetic was favourably disposed towards 
the brahman Sela. Then as Sela the brahman, surrounded by the 
three hundred brahman youths, was pacing up and down and 
roaming about on foot he approached the hermitage of Keniya the 
matted hair ascetic. And in the hermitage of Keniya the matted 
hair ascetic Sela the brahman saw some people digging pits . . . some 
getting ready seats, and Keniya the matted hair ascetic himself 
preparing a pavilion. So he spoke thus to Keniya the matted hair 
ascetic: 

“ How now, is there to be a marriage 3 at the good Kenya's or a 
giving in marriage, or is a great oblation arranged, or has King 
Bimbisara of Magadha been invited for the morrow together with his 
troops ?” 

“ No, Sela, there is to be no marriage with me nor giving in 
marriage, nor has King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha been invited 
for the morrow together with his troops. But I have arranged a 
great oblation: the recluse Gotama, son of the Sakyans, gone forth 
from the Sakyan clan, who has been walking on tour among the 
people of Anguttarapa, together with a large Order of monks, with 
twelve hundred and fifty monks, has arrived at Apana. [Sn. 100] 
The most lovely report has gone abroad thus concerning the recluse 
Gotama . . . the Awakened One, the Lord. He has been invited by 
me for the morrow together with the Order of monks.” 


1 maridalamdla . MA. iii. 400 calls it diissamandala , a cloth (covered) 
pavilion (?). SnA . ii. 447 says “he made a pavilion with a canopy” (or 
awning). 

2 As at M . ii. 133. 

8 From here to “ hard to come by in the world ” below, cf . with Vin. ii. 155. 



Sn. 106-108 


With Sela 


335 


“ Keniya, did you say * Awakened One 9 V’ 

“ I did say 1 2 * 4 Awakened One/ Sela.” 

44 Keniya, did you say 4 Awakened One ’ ?” 

44 I did say 4 Awakened One/ Sela/’ 

Then it occurred to the brahman Sela: “Even this sound 
‘ Awakened One ’ is hard to come by in the world. But in our 
mantras the thirty-two marks of a Great Man are traditional. For 
a Great Man endowed with these, only two courses are open, not 
another . . .* But if he goes forth from home into homelessness he 
becomes a perfected one, a fully Self- Awakened One, a lifter of the 
world’s veil. And where, good Keniya, is this revered Gotama, 
perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One, staying at present ?” 

When this had been said, Keniya the matted hair ascetic, stretching 
out his right arm, spoke thus to Sela the brahman: [Sn. 107 ] 44 There, 
good Sela, by that dark blue line of forest.” Then Sela the brahman 
with the three hundred brahman youths approached the Lord. Then 
Sela the brahman addressed these brahman youths, saying: 

44 Come quietly, good sirs, (carefully) placing foot after foot; for, 
like lone-faring lions, 2 these Lords are hard to approach. So if I 
should hold converse with the recluse Gotama, do not interrupt me, 
good sirs; but wait for me until the end of the conversation.” 

Then Sela the brahman approached the Lord ; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, he sat down at respectful distance. As he was 
sitting down at a respectful distance Sela the brahman looked for the 
thirty-twc marks of a Great Man on the Lord’s body . . . s [/Sn. 108 ] 
Then the Lord, having put out his tongue, stroked it backwards and 
forwards over both his ears and he stroked it backwards and forwards 
over both his nostrils and he covered the whole dome of his forehead 
with his tongue. 

Then it occurred to Sela the brahman: 44 The Lord is endowed with 
the thirty-two marks of a Great Man in full, not partially, but yet I 
do not know whether he is an Awakened One or not. Ail the same, 

I Lave heard it said by aged brahmans, full of years, teachers of 

teachers : 4 When their own praises are being spoken, those that are 
perfected ones, fully Self- Awakened Ones reveal the self. 4 Suppose 


1 As in Sta. 91 (M. ii. 134). 

2 MA. iii. 401, the solitary lion is watchful and diligent, appamada. It is to 
mark the diligent dwelling that this simile is made. 

2 As in Sta. 91 (M. ii. 135). 

4 aitdnam patukaronti; cf. Vin . ii. 186, A . iii. 123, i.e. manifest, or make 



336 


92. Selasutta 


Sn. 108-109 


that I, face to face with the recluse Gotama were to praise him in 
suitable verses V* Then Sela the brahman, face to face with the 
Lord, praised him in suitable verses: 

Sela “ Your 1 body is complete, 2 gleaming, finely proportioned, 3 
beautiful to behold; 

you are the colour of gold, the Lord; lustrous your teeth, 
you are heroic. 

Indeed those distinguishing signs of a finely proportioned 
man — 

all these marks of a Great Man are on your body. 

Your eyes are clear, the face is full, 4 you are well grown, 6 
straight, splendid ; 

in the midst of an Order of recluses you shine like the sun. 

Lovely to see is a monk with a golden coloured skin; 

but for this recluseship what use is such supremacy of 
colour ? e 

You should be a king, a wheel- turner, a bull of charioteers, 7 

victor over the whole world, chief of the Rose-apple Grove. 8 

[Sw. 109 ] Nobles and wealthy kings will be your vassals; 

you are king of kings, the lord of men; rule, 0 Gotama,” 


1 Cf. Thag . 818-837, the verses ascribed to Sela, and the responses as below. 

* Le. with the full complement of 44 marks,” MA. iii. 402, 

* sujdta. I have taken this as does Bu. : 44 well bom in regard to excellence 
of height to breadth, to excellence of form,” so as to keep a reference to the 
44 mark ” that is 41 symmetry.” 

4 “ Like the face of the full moon,” MA. iii. 402. Cf. e.g. Sumrnaprabhasa 
Sutra, Ch. XII (as given in R. Robinson’s Chinese Buddhist Verse , London, 
1954): 44 The countenance of the Buddha is like the clear full moon,” This 
is only one of many examples of this simile. 

6 hr aha. This also refers to the symmetrical development of height to 

breadth when the arms are stretched out. The next refers to the limbs being 
as straight as Brahma’s, • uttamavannino. 

7 rathesabho . MA. iii. 402 explains by uttamarathi , with v.l. uttamasdrathl - 
sdrathx , charioteer, occurring in the stock description of the Buddha. Thag A. 
ii. 44 (SHB) explains by rathesu ajdniya-usabhapuriso maharathiko , in regard 
to chariots he is a thoroughbred bull of a man, a great charioteer. 

8 The same as Jambudipa, India. Thag A. ii. 44 (SHB) says that a wheel- 
turner is not merely Lord of Jambudipa but of the four great 41 continents ” 
or 44 islands ” as well. 


visible, exhibit, bring to light, 44 betray ” ( O.S. iii. 98) the s&f. But in the 
Buddha’s Teaching this is what a foolish person does, e.g . Devadatta, not 
arahants, and, at D . iii. 115 not the Tathagata. 



Sn. 109-110 


With Sela 


337 


Gotama “lama king, Sela,” said the Lord, 

“ a matchless king under dhamma; 

I turn the wheel by dhamma } 

the wheel that cannot be turned back.” 

Sela “ Self-Awakened do you profess to be,” said Sela the 
brahman, 

“ * A matchless king under dhamma ; 

I turn the wheel by dhamma ’ — thus, Gotama, you speak. 
But who is the revered one’s captain, 
the disciple second to the Teacher ? 

Who turns on this wheel of dhamma 
That was set turning by you ?” 

Gotama “ The wheel set turning by me, 

Sela,” said the Lord, 

“ The matchless wheel of dhamma — 

Sariputta 1 2 turns it on; 

he is heir born 3 to the Tathagata. 

What is to be known is known by me, and to be developed 
developed is, 

what is to be got rid of has been got rid of — therefore, 
brahman, am I Awake. 4 
Dispel your doubt in me, have faith, brahman. 

Ever difficult to come by is the sight of Self- Awakened 
Ones. 

[$n. 110] Ever difficult to come by is their appearance in 
the world. 

But I, brahman, am Self- Awakened, a physician without 
peer, 

Brahma-become, without compare, crushing Mara’s hosts ; 
having mastered all foes I rejoice, with no fear from 
anywhere.” 


1 Beginning with the four peerless arousinga of mindfulness. The wheel of 
command is: get rid of this, make that arise. The wheel of dhamma is, 
beginning with dhamma , as learning, pariyaitidhammai 4 This, monks, is the 
ariyan truth of anguish,’ MA . iii. 403. 

2 According to the Comys. Sariputta was sitting nearby. 

3 anujdta , “ taking after ” or “bom equal to.” See Itu p. 63 for three 
kinds of children: avajdta , anujdta, atijata . Here no physical relationship 
to the Tathagata is meant, simply “ heir in dhamma ” as in M. Sta. 12. 

4 This line and the preceding one are also found at M. ii. 143. 



338 

Sela 


92. Selasutta 


Sn. 110-111 


“ Attend to this, good sirs. As speaks the Visioned One, 
physician, great hero, so roars the forest-lion. 

Seeing him, Brahma-become, without compare, crushing 
Mara’s hosts, 

who should not have faith — even a base-born black ? 
Who wishes, let him follow me; or, who wishes it not, let 
him depart; 

but I will go forth here under Him of Excellent Wisdom.” 

Brahmans “ If this teaching of the fully Self- Awakened One is 
agreeable to your reverence, 
we too will go forth under Him of Excellent Wisdom.” 

Sela “ These three hundred brahmans, their palms joined in 
salutation, are asking 

to fare the Brahma-faring under you, 0 Lord.” 

Gotarm “ Well taught 1 is the Brahma-faring, Sela,” said the Lord, 
“ It is self-realised, it is timeless. 

The going forth in it is nothing vain for him who trains 
diligently.” 

Sela the brahman and his company received the going forth under 
the Lord, they received ordination. 

Then towards the end of that night, Keniya the matted hair ascetic, 
having had sumptuous foods, solid and soft, prepared in his own 
hermitage, [/Sn 111] had the time announced to the Lord, saying: 
" It is time, good Gotama, the meal is ready.” Then the Lord, 
dressing in the morning, taking his bowl and robe, approached the 
hermitage of the matted hair ascetic Kepiya ; having approached, he 
sat down on the appointed seat together with the Order of monks. 
Then Keijiya the matted hair ascetic with his own hand served and 
satisfied the Order of monks with the Awakened One at its head with 
sumptuous foods, solid and soft. When the Lord had eaten and had 
withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Keniya the matted hair ascetic, 
taking a low seat, sat down at a respectful distance. As Keniya the 
matted hair ascetic was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
Lord thanked him in these verses: 

“ Sacrifice is chief in fire-worship, 2 
Savitrl chief of Vedic metres, 

— — — } 

1 MA, iii. 406 says that the use of this phrase means Bela and the three 

hundred brahmans went forth by the 4 Come, bhikkhu ’ formula. 

9 For notes on these verses, which occur at Vin, i. 246, see B.D. iv. 340. 



Sn. 111-112 


With Sela 


339 


A king is chief of men, 

The ocean chief of waters. 

The moon is chief of the lamps of night, 

The sun the chief of luminaries, 

For those giving alms, desiring merit, 

The Order is indeed the chief.” 

When the Lord had thanked the matted hair ascetic Keniya in 
these verses, rising from his seat, he departed. 

Then the venerable Sela and his company, dwelling alone, aloof, 
diligent, ardent, self-resolute, [Sn. 112] having soon realised here and 
now by their own super-knowledge that matchless goal of the 
Brahma-faring for the sake of which young men of family rightly go 
forth from home into homelessness, entering on it abided therein; 
and they knew: “ Destroyed is birth, brought to a close the Brahma- 
faring, done is what was to be done, there is no more of being such or 
so.” And the venerable Sela and his company became perfected 
ones. Then the venerable Sela and his company approached the 
Lord; having approached, having arranged his upper robe over one 
shoulder, having saluted the Lord with joined palms, he addressed 
the Lord in verses i 1 

“ Eight days ago, 0 Visioned One, we came to you for refuge; 

Lord, through your teaching we were tamed in seven nights. 

You are the Wake, you the Teacher, you the Seer who is Mara’s 
victor; 

Having cut out latent tendencies, you, crossed over, help this 
mortality to cross. 

The basis (for rebirth) has been transcended by you, the cankers 
shattered by you. 

A lion are you, without attachment, who has got rid of fear and 
dread. 

These three hundred monks are standing with joined palms — 
Stretch forth your feet, 0 Hero, let great beings 2 honour the 
Teacher.” 


Discourse with Sela : 
The Second 


1 As at Thag. 838-841. 


2 naga , as in M. Stas. 5, 24 ( M . i. 32, 151). 



93. DISCOURSE WITH ASSALAYANA 


(Assalayanasutta) 

[147] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near 
Savatth! in the Jeta Grove in Anathapii^ika’s monastery. Now at 
that time at least five hundred brahmans from a number of districts 
were residing at Savatth! on some business or other. Then it 
occurred to these brahmans: “ This recluse Gotama lays down the 
purity of the four castes. Now, who is capable of arguing about this 
saying with the recluse Gotama ?” At that time the brahman 
youth Assalayana was residing at Savatth!. He was young, his 
head shaven, sixteen years of age from his birth ; he was master of the 
three Vedas . . A . . proficient in . . . the marks of a Great Man. 
Then it occurred to these brahmans: “ This brahman youth Assala- 
yana is residing at Savatth!. He is young, his head shaven . . . 
proficient in * . . the marks of a Great Man. He is capable of 
arguing about this saying with the recluse Gotama.” Then these 
brahmans approached the brahman youth Assalayana; having 
approached, they spoke thus to the brahman youth Assalayana: 

“ Good Assalayana, this recluse Gotama lays down the purity of 
the four castes ; you go, good Assalayana, and argue about this saying 
with the recluse Gotama.” 

When this had been said, Assalayana the brahman youth spoke 
thus to those brahmans: “ Truly, sirs, is the recluse Gotama a speaker 
on dhamma but speakers on dhamma are difficult to argue with. I am 
not able to argue about this saying with the recluse Gotama.” And 
a second time these brahmans spoke thus to the brahman youth 
Assalayana: “ Good Assalayana, this recluse Gotama lays down the 
purity of the four cabtes; you go, good Assalayana, [148] and argue 
about this saying with the recluse Gotama. A wanderer’s (life) is led 
by the good Assalayana.” 

And a second time Assalayana the brahman youth spoke thus to 
those brahmans: “ Truly, sirs, is the recluse Gotama a speaker on 
dhamma but speakers on dhamma are difficult to argue with. I am 
not able to argue about this saying with the recluse Gotama.” 


1 As in Sta. 91 ( M . ii. 133). 
340 



II. 148-149 


341 


With Assaldyana 

And a third time these brahmans spoke thus to the brahman youth 
Assalayana: “ Good Assalayana, this recluse Gotama lays down the 
purity of the four castes; you go, good Assalayana, and argue about 
this saying with the recluse Gotama. A wanderer’s life is led by the 
good Assalayana. Let not the good Assalayana be defeated in a 
defeat without resistance.” 1 When this had been said, Assalayana 
the brahman youth spoke thus to those brahmans: 

“ Sirs, truly the recluse Gotama is a speaker on dkamma but 
speakers on dhamma are difficult to argue with. I am not able to 
argue about this saying with the recluse Gotama. All the same, I 
will go at the bidding of the reverend ones.” 

Then Assalayana the brahman youth together with a large 
concourse of brahmans approached the Lord ; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the Lord ; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was 
sitting down at a respectful distance, Assalayana the brahman youth 
spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ Good Gotama, brahmans speak thus: ‘ Only brahmans form the 
best caste, all other castes are low; only brahmans form the fair 
caste, all other castes are dark; only brahmans are pure, not non- 
brahmans; only brahmans are own sons of Brahma, born of his 
mouth, born of Brahma, formed by Brahma, heirs to Brahma.’ 2 
What does the good Gotama say about this ?” 

“ But, Assalayana, brahman wives of brahmans are known 3 to 
have their seasons and to conceive and to give birth and to give suck. 
Yet these brahmans, bom of woman like everyone else, speak thus: 
‘ Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to Brahma/ ” 

[149] “ Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 
consider it thus: 1 Only brahmans . , . heirs to Brahma/ ” 

“ What do you think about this, Assalayana 1 Have you heard 
that in Yona 4 and Kamboja 6 and other adjacent districts there are 
only two castes, the master and the slave ? And that having been 

1 Wanderers preserve the mantras and behave as they have learnt and 
been taught. Therefore Assalayana will not be defeated, but will be the 
victor. MA, iii, 408. 

2 As at M . ii. 84. 

* Brahman women are seen being led to weddings so as to provide brahmans 
with sons, MA. iii. 408. 

4 See DPPN . where " probably the Pali equivalent for Ionians, Baotrian 
Greeks. ... In later times, the name Yavana or Yona seems to have 
included all westerners living in India.” 

* A Mahajanapada belonging not to the Middle Country but to Uttarapatha. 



342 93. Assdayanasutta II. 149-150 

a master one becomes a slave; having been a slave one becomes a 
master V n 

44 Yes, I have heard this, sir. In Yona and Kamboja . . . having 
been a slave one becomes a master.” 

44 In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: * Only brahmans form the best 
caste . . . heirs of Brahma 9 ?” 

“ Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 
consider it thus : 1 * * 4 Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.’ ” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? If a noble made 
onslaught on creatures, took what had not been given, wrongly 
enjoyed pleasures of the senses, were a liar, of slanderous speech, of 
harsh speech, a gossip, covetous, malevolent in mind, of wrong view 
— would only he at the breaking up of the body after dying arise in 
the sorrowful way, the bad botfm, the Downfall, Niraya Hell, and 
not a brahman ? Nor yet a merchant ? And would a worker if he 
made onslaught on creatures . . . were ... of wrong view — would he 
at the breaking up of the body after dying, arise in the sorrowful 
way . . , Niraya Hell, and not a brahman ?” 

44 This is not so, good Gotama. If a noble, good Gotama, made 
onslaught on creatures, took what had not been given ... at the 
breaking up of the body after dying he would arise in . . . Niraya 
Hell. And so would a brahman, good Gotama, and so would a 
merchant, good Gotama, and so would a worker, good Gotama — so, 
good Gotama, if they made onslaught on creatures, [150] took what 
had not been given . . . were ... of wrong view, all the four castes at 
the breaking up of the body after dying would arise in the sorrowful 
way, the bad bourn, the Downfall, Niraya Hell.” 

44 In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: 4 Only brahmans form the best 
caste . . . heirs of Brahma * ?” 

44 Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 
consider it thus: 4 Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.’ ” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? If a brahman 

1 MA. iii. 409 says that if a brahman and his wife go trading in adjacent 

districts he may die there leaving no son, and the wife may have intercourse 
with a. slave or workman. Any son bom is a slave, although “ pure ” on his 

mother’s side. If this son goes to trade in the Middle Country and marries 

a brahman girl, any son born will be “ pure ” only on his mother’s side. 



II. 150-151 


343 


refrained from onslaught on creatures, from taking what had not 
been given, from wrong enjoyment of the sense-pleasures, from being 
a liar, from slanderous speech, from harsh speech, from being a 
gossip, were not covetous, were benevolent in mind and of right 
view — would only he at the breaking up of the body after dying 
arise in a good bourn, a heaven world, and not a noble, nor a merchant, 
nor a worker ?” 

“ That is not so, good Gotama. If a noble refrained from onslaught 
on creatures . , , were benevolent in mind and of right view, at the 
breaking up of the body after dying he would arise in a good bourn, 
a heaven world. And so would a brahman, good Gotama, and so 
would a merchant, good Gotama, and so would a worker, good 
Gotama — so, good Gotama, if they refrained from onslaught on 
creatures, from taking what had not been given . . . were benevolent 
in mind and of right view, all the four castes at the breaking up of 
the body after dying would arise in a good bourn, a heaven world.” 

44 In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: * Only brahmans form the best 
caste . . . heirs to Brahma * ?” 

44 Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet [ 151 ] brahmans still 
consider it thus: 4 Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.’ ” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? Is it only a 
brahman who, on this supposition, 1 is capable of developing a- mind 
of friendliness that is without enmity, without malevolence ? And 
not a noble, not a merchant, not a worker ?” 

44 That is not so, good Gotama. On this supposition, a noble too, 
good Gotama, is capable of developing a mind of friendliness that is 
without enmity, without malevolence; and also a brahman, good 
Gotama, and also a merchant, good Gotama, and also a worker, good 
Gotama — so, good Gotama, on this supposition all the four castes 
are capable of developing a mind of friendliness that is without enmity, 
without malevolence.” 

4 4 In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: 4 Only brahmans form the best 
caste . . . heirs to Brahma 9 V 9 

44 Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 

1 asmirh pad-ese. The meaning of padesa as “ showing, pointing out, 
decision, appealing to precedent ” seems unknown to the Pali Dictionaries. 
But see Monier-Williams under pra-dib, “ to point out, show, announce, 
communicate,” etc. 




344 93. AssalayanasiUta II. 151-152 

consider it thus: 1 Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma. 1 ” 

“ What do you think about this, Assalayana ? Is it only a 
brahman who, taking a back-scratcher and bath-powder 1 and going 
to a river, is capable of cleansing himself of dust and mud ? And 
not a noble, not a merchant, not a worker V 9 

“ That is not so, good Gotama. A noble too, good Gotama, who, 
taking a back-scratcher and bath-powder and going to a river, is 
capable of cleansing himself of dust and mud. And so is a brahman 
. , , and so is a merchant . . . and so is a worker, good Gotama — so, 
good Gotama, all the four castes, taking a back-scratcher and bath- 
powder and going to a river, are capable of cleansing themselves of 
dust and mud.” 

“ In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: * Only brahmans form the best 
caste . . . heirs to Brahma ?” 

“ Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 
consider it thus: ‘ Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.* ” 

“ What do you think about this, Assalayana ? If 2 a noble 
anointed king [152] were to assemble a hundred men of varying 
origins, saying to them: ‘ Let the good sirs come; and let those who 
are of noble, priestly and royal families, bringing an upper piece of 
fire-stick 3 of teak 4 or sal or of a sweet-scented tree 5 or of sandal or 
lotus, light a fire and get it to give out heat. But let the good sirs 
come; and let those who are from a despised family, a trapper 
family, a bamboo-plaiter family, a Cartwright family, a scavenger 
family, 6 * bringing an upper piece of fire-stick from a dog’s trough or 
a pig’s trough or from a trough for dyeing or dry sticks from a castor- 
oil shrub, light a fire and get it to give out heat/ What do you think 
about this, Assalayana % Is the fire that is lit and the heat that is 
got by someone — no matter whether he be from a noble, priestly or 
royal family, and no matter whether he bring an upper piece of fire- 
stick of teak or sal or of a sweet-scented tree or of sandal or lotus — 


1 Cf. M. ii. 46, 182; and cf. MA . iii. 280 with Yin. ii, 106. 

* As at M. ii. 183. a Cf. M. i. 240. 

* sakassd va> as in two versions, and as at M . ii. 183. Cf. also sakakaUham 

, , . salakaftham at M . ii. 129. 

6 salafa as at e.g. Bwdv. II. 61. Translators (Min. Anth . iii. p. 11) say this 

is probably a pine tree, Pinus Devadara. 

* For notes on these five kinds of “ low birth ” see B.D. ii. 173 /. 



II. 152-153 


345 


With Assalayana 

is it a fixe that has flame and hue and brightness 1 and, being this fire, 
is it able to serve the purposes of a fire ? But is the fire that is lit 
and the heat that is got by someone — no matter whether he be from 
a despised family, a trapper family, a bamboo-plaiter family, a 
Cartwright family, a scavenger family, and no matter whether he 
bring an upper piece of fire-stick from a dog’s trough or a pig’s 
trough or from a trough for dyeing or dry sticks from a castor-oil 
shrub — is it a fire that has neither flame nor hue nor brightness and, 
being this fire, is it unable to serve the purposes of a fire V 9 

“ That is not so, good Gotama. Whoever from a noble, priestly 
or royal family, bringing an upper piece of fire-stick of teak or sal or 
of a sweet-scented tree or of sandal or lotus, lights a fire and gets it 
to give out heat — this fire has flame and hue and brightness and is 
able to serve the purposes of a fire. And too, whoever from a des- 
pised family, a trapper family, a bamboo-plaiter family, a eartwright 
family, a scavenger family, bringing an upper piece of fire-stick from 
a dog’s trough or a pig’s trough or a trough for dyeing or dry sticks 
from a castor-oil shrub, lights a fire and gets it to give out heat— 
this fire too has flame and hue and brightness and is able to serve the 
purposes of a fire. So, good Gotama, all these fires have flame [153] 
and hue and brightness and are able to serve the purposes of a 
fire.” 

“ In reference to this then, Assalayana, on what strength and 
authority do brahmans speak thus: * Only brahmans form the best 
caste, all other castes are low; only brahmans form the fair caste, all 
other castes are dark; only brahmans are pure, not non-brahmans; 
only brahmans are sons of Brahma, born of his mouth, born of 
Brahma, formed by Brahma, heirs to Brahma 9 ?” 

“ Although the good Gotama speaks thus, yet brahmans still 
consider it thus: * Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.’ ” 

“ What do you think about this, Assalayana ? Suppose a noble 
youth were to consort with a brahman girl and as a result a son were 
born to them. 2 Would that son of the noble youth and the brahman 
girl be like his mother and also like his father, and should he be 
called 4 noble*’ and also * brahman ’? ” 

“ Whatever son, good Gotama, were born to a noble youth and a 
brahman girl, he would be like his mother and also like his father, and 
he should be called ‘ noble ’ and also * brahman.’ ” 


1 pabhassara here; abha at if. ii. 130. 
* Cf. D. i. 07. 



346 93. Assaldyanasutta II. 153-154 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? Suppose a brah- 
man youth were to consort with a noble girl and as a result a son 
were born to them. 1 Would that son . . . and should he be called 
4 noble * and also * brahman * 1” 

44 Whatever son, good Gotama, were bom to a brahman youth and 
a noble girl, he would be like his mother and also like his father, and 
he should be called 4 noble * and also 4 brahman.’ ” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? Suppose a mare 
were mated with an ass and as a result a foal 2 were bom of this 
mating. Would that foal of the mare and the ass be like the mother 
and also like the father, and should it be called 4 horse ’ and also 
4 ass ’ T 

44 Because of its crossed birth, 3 good Gotama, it is a mule. This, 
[154] good Gotama, is a difference that I see for it, but elsewhere, for 
the others, I see no difference at all.” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? There might be 
two brahman youths here, uterine brothers, the one skilled (in the 
Vedas), educated (in them), the other unskilled, uneducated. To 
which of these would brahmans first serve offerings for the dead 4 
or cereals or oblations or meals for guests ?” 

44 Good Gotama, brahmans would first serve offerings for the dead 
or cereals or oblations or meals for guests to that brahman youth 
who is skilled (in the Vedas), educated (in them). For, good 
Gotama, what great fruit could there be of a gift to an unskilled, 
uneducated (person) ?” 

44 What do you think about this, Assalayana ? There might be 
two brahman youths here, uterine brothers, the one skilled (in the 
Vedas), educated (in them), but of bad moral habit, of evil character, 
and the other not skilled, uneducated, but of moral habit, lovely in 
character. To which of these would brahmans first serve offerings 
for the dead ... or meals for guests ?” 

44 Good Gotama, brahmans would first serve offerings for the dead 
... or meals for guests to that brahman youth who is not skilled (in 
the Vedas), uneducated (in them), but who is of moral habit, lovely 


1 Cf. IK i. 97. 

2 Icuora , with v. 11. ktssero, kissaro . Childers gives “colt.” Kiiara in 

Sanskrit. 

3 vekuranjaya, with v. 11 kundath , kumarandu. Neumann (II. 554) says: 
read vekuranvdya = mikriyanvayaya. 

4 These four kinds of offerings also mentioned at D. i. 97. The first, “ a 
gift for departed relatives,” is saddha. 



II. 154-155 With Assalayana 347 

in character. For, good Gotama, what great fruit could there be of 
a gift to (a person of) bad moral habit, of evil character ?” 

“ First you, Assalayana, went on about birth ; leaving birth you 
went on about mantras ; leaving mantras you arrived at the purity 
of the four castes which is just what I lay down.” 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Assalayana sat 
silent, ashamed, his shoulders drooped, his face cast down, overcome 
with disappointment, at a loss for an answer. Then the Lord, 
understanding why Assalayana the brahman youth was silent, 
ashamed, his shoulders drooped, his face cast down, overcome with 
disappointment, at a loss for an answer, spoke thus to Assalayana 
the brahman youth : 

“ Once upon a time, 1 Assalayana, while seven brahman seers were 
living in leaf huts in a stretch of forest a pernicious view like this 
arose in them: * Only brahmans form the best caste, [155] all other 
castes are low , . . heirs to Brahma.* And, Assalayana, the seer 
Asita Devala 2 heard : ‘ Indeed seven brahman seers are living in 
leaf huts in a stretch of forest and a pernicious view like this has 
arisen in them: “ Only brahmans form the best caste . . . heirs to 
Brahma.** * Then, Assalayana, the seer Asita Devala, having trim- 
med his hair and beard, having clothed himself in a pair of crimson 
coloured cloths, having put on sandals with many linings 3 and taking 
a staff made of gold, appeared in a cell in a hall 4 5 of the seven brahman 
seers. And then, Assalayana, as the seer Asita Devala was pacing 
up and down in the ctell in a hall of the seven brahman seers, he spoke 
thus: * Now, where have these revered brahman seers gone ? Now, 
where have these revered brahman seers gone V Then, Assalayana, 
it occurred to the seven brahman seers: ‘ Who is it who, while pacing 
up and down like a village lad 6 in a cell in a hall of the seven brahman 


1 Before Gotama’s birth, MA . iii. 411. 

2 Cf. Jd. iii. 466. MA. iii, 411 says Asita was Kalaka, Devala was his 
name, and at that time the Lord was he. The name Kalaka probably identifies 
Asita With Kala (or Asita) Devala of the Indriya-jataka , Jd. iii. 463 ff. At 
Mhvu. ii, 37 the seer Asita, who prophesied that the infant Gotama would 
become a Buddha, calls himself Kala. 

3 ataliyo, also at S. i. 226; explained at MA. iii. 411, SA . i. 346 by ganangarm, 
for which see Vin. i. 185. 

4 pattliaiidila; MA. iii. 411 explains by panrmsdlaparivena^ a cell in a leaf 
hall. 

5 gamaiidala , as at Thag . 1143. MA. iii. 411 explains by gamadaraka , 

a village youngster; c/, Thag A. on ver. 1143. There is probably also a hidden 
idea of “ an ox (go) walking round and round on a threshing-floor.” 



348 


II. 155-156 


93. AssalayanasitUa 

seers, speaks thus: “ Now, where have these revered brahman seers 
gone ? Now, where have these revered brahman seers gone V* 9 
Then, Assalayana, the seven brahman seers put a curse on the seer 
Asita Devala, saying : ‘ Become a vile cinder.’ 1 But, Assalayana, the 
more the seven brahman seers cursed the seer Asita Devala, the more 
lovely became the seer Asita Devala, the more good to look upon and 
the more charming. Then, Assalayana, it occurred to the seven 
brahman seers: ‘Vain is austerity 2 for us, fruitless the Brahma- 
faring. Formerly when we put a curse on anyone, saying: Become 
a vile cinder, he became as a cinder; but the more we put a curse on 
this one the more lovely he becomes, the more good to look upon, the 
more charming.’ 

4 Austerity is not vain for the revered ones, nor fruitless the 
Brahma-faring. But, revered sirs, please get rid of your mis- 
apprehension about me.’ 

[156] * We will get rid of whatever misapprehension there is. But 
who is the revered sir V 

* Is the seer Asita Devala known to the revered sirs V 

* Yes, sir.’ 

* I, sirs, am he.’ Then, Assalayana, the seven brahman seers 
approached the seer Asita Devala in order to honour him. Then, 
Assalayana, the seer Asita Devala spake thus to those seven brahman 
seers: * I have heard this, good sirs: While seven brahman seers were 
living in leaf huts in a stretch of forest a pernicious view like this 
arose in them: “ Only brahmans form the best caste, all other castes 
are low; only brahmans form the fair caste, all other castes are dark; 
only brahmans are pure, not non-brahmans; only brahmans are 
own sons of Brahma, born of his mouth, bom of Brahma, formed by 
Brahma, heirs to Brahma.” * 

4 Yes, sir.’ 

* But do you, sirs, know whether their mothers consorted only 
with brahmans, not with non-brahmans V 

* No, sir.’ 

* And do you, sirs, know whether their mothers’ mothers back 
through seven generations consorted only with brahmans, not with 
non-brahmans ?’ 


1 Or, “ become a cinder, vile one.” 

* tapo, perhaps magical heat produced by ascetic practice. As this was 
used to reduce one’s enemies or opponents to cinders, so here tapo may have 
the double meaning of austerity (balancing the Brahma-faring) and of power 
to bum up others. 



II. 156-157 With Assalayana 349 

4 No, sir/ 

4 And do you, sirs, know whether their fathers consorted only with 
brahman women, not with non-brahman women V 
4 No, sir/ 

4 And do you, sirs, know whether their fathers’ fathers back through 
seven generations consorted only with brahman women, not non- 
brahman women V 
4 No, sir/ 

4 But do you, sirs, know how there is conception V 
4 We do know, sir, how there is conception. [157] There is here a 
coitus of the parents, it is the mother’s season and the gandhabba is 
present; it is on the conjuction of these three things that there is 
conception/ 1 * 

4 But do you, sirs, know whether that gandkabba is a noble or 
brahman or merchant or worker V 

4 We do not know, sir, whether that gandhabba is a noble or a 
brahman or a merchant or a worker/ 

4 This being so, do you know, sirs, who you are V 
4 This being so, sir, we do not know who we are/ 

Assalayana, these seven so called brahman seers, on being 
questioned, cross-questioned and pressed for an answer by the seer 
Asita Devala concerning their own claims to lineage were not able to 
explain. So how can you, on being questioned, cross-questioned and 
pressed for an answer by me now explain your own claims to lineage 
— you who have the same teacher as they have, but not Pu$na the 
holder of the oblation-ladle ?” a 

When this had been said, Assalayana the brahman youth spoke 
thus to the Lord; 44 It is excellent, good Gotama, it is excellent, good 
Gotama. May the good Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple going 
for refuge from this day forth for as long as life lasts/’ 3 

Discourse with Assalayana : 

The Third 


1 See M . i. 265-266. 

s dabbigaha . MA* iii. 412: “ Punna was the name of a benefactor of those 
seven seers; he took a ladle and cooked pan7ia, leaves. He knew the art of 
handling the ladle. But he is not one of their teachers whom you (Assalayana) 
also have; therefore you do not even know the art of handling a ladle.*’ 

3 The usual formula for asking to become a lay disciple does not appear to 
occur here in full. The text does not even give abbreviation or omission 
marks. 



94. DISCOURSE WITH GHOTAMUKHA 

(Ghotamukhasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the venerable Udena was staying 
near Benares in the Khemiya Mango Grove. Now at that time the 
brahman Ghotamukha had arrived at Benares on some business or 
other. Then while the brahman Ghotamukha [158] was pacing up 
and down and roaming about on foot he approached the Khemiya 
Mango Grove. Now at that time the venerable Udena was pacing 
up and down in the open. Then the brahman Ghotamukha 
approached the venerable Udena; having approached, he exchanged 
greetings with the venerable Udena, and having conversed in a 
friendly and courteous way, he spoke thus, while still pacing up and 
down, to the venerable Udena while he was still pacing up and down : l 
“ My good recluse, there is no going forth under dhamma , 2 or so it 
seems to me; but then is this through not seeing revered men like 
yourself, or that which, in this matter, is dhamma V’ 

When this had been said, the venerable Udena came down from 
the place for pacing up and down, entered a dwelling-place and sat 
down on an appointed seat. And the brahman Ghotamukha also 
coming down from the place for pacing up and down and entering the 
dwelling-place stood at a respectful distance. The venerable Udena 
spoke thus to the brahman Ghotamukha as he was standing at a 
respectful distance: “ Brahman, there are seats; do sit down if you 
like.” 

“ While waiting for the good Udena we do not sit down. For 
how could one like me presume to sit down on a seat before being 
invited V* Then the brahman Ghotamukha, having taken a low 
seat, sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting down at 
a respectful distance, the brahman Ghotamukha spoke thus to the 
venerable Udena: “ My good recluse, there is no going forth under 
dhammay or so it seems to me; but then, is this through not seeing 
revered men like yourself, or that which, in this matter, is 
dhamma ?” 

1 Following the v.l. cankamantam, instead of text’s ekamantam. 

* dhammiko paribbtijo, explained by dhammika pabbajja at MA. iii. 412. 

350 



II. 168-160 With Ghotamuhha 351 

“ But if you, brahman, could allow what is approved by me, and 
could reject what should be rejected, and should you not know the 
meaning of what is said by me were to question me further about it, 
saying; ‘ What is this, good Udena, what is the meaning of that V 
— having arranged it like this we might have some conversa- 
tion” 

“ I will allow what is approved by the good Udena, and I will 
reject what should be rejected, and if I [169] do not know the meaning 
of what is said by the good Udena I will question the honoured Udena 
further about it, saying; * What is this, good Udena, what is the 
meaning of that V — having arranged it like this let there be some 
conversation between us.” 

“ Brahman, these four kinds of persons are found existing in the 
world . . .* [160] . . . But, good Udena, whatever person is neither a 
self-tormentor, intent on the practice of self-torment, nor a 
tormentor or others, intent on the practice of tormenting others, 
he, neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now 
allayed, quenched, become cool, an experieneer of bliss that lives with 
self Brahma-become. He does not mortify or torment either himself 
or others— (all of them) yearning for happiness and recoiling from 
pain. Therefore this person appeals to my mind.” 

“ Brahman, there are these two companies. 1 2 Which two ? 
Here, brahman, some company, inflamed with a passion for gems and 
jewelry, 3 looks about for a wife and children, men and women slaves, 
fields and sites, gold and silver. But here, brahman, some company, 
not inflamed with a passion for gems and jewelry, getting rid of wife 
and children, men and women slaves, fields and sites, gold and silver, 
goes forth from home into homelessness. This person, brahman, 
neither torments himself nor is intent on the practice of self-torment, 
he is not a tormentor of others nor intent on the practice of torment- 
ing others. He, neither a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, 
is here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, an experieneer of bliss 
that lives with self Brahma-become, In which company do you, 
brahman, mostly see that man— in that company that is inflamed 
with a passion for gems and jewelry and looks about for a wife and 
children, men and women slaves, fields and sites, gold and silver; 
or in that company that is not inflamed with a passion for gems and 

1 As at M . i. 341, above, p. 5 Jf. * Cf. A. i. 70-76. 

3 manikufujalem; perhaps jewelled earrings ; cf. M. ii. 64. Also see S. i. 77= 
Dhp. 345, 346= Ja. ii. 140 for the sentiment expressed in the first half of this 

paragraph, and Thag, 187. 



352 94. Qhotamukhasutta II. 160-162 

jewelry and that, getting rid of wife and children, men and women 
slaves, fields and sites, gold and silver, goes forth from home into 
homelessness ?” 

[181] “ This man, good Udena, who is neither a tormentor of self 
intent on the practice of tormenting self, who is not a tormentor of 
others intent on the practice of tormenting others, and who, neither 
a self-tormentor nor a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, 
quenched, become cool, an experiencer of bliss that lives with self 
Brahma-become — I mostly see that man in that company that is not 
inflamed with a passion for gems and jewelry and that, getting rid of 
wife and children, men and women slaves, fields and sites, gold and 
silver, goes forth from home into homelessness.” 

“ But this was said by you just now, brahman: ‘ We understand 
thus, good recluse, there is no going forth under dhamma , or so it 
seems to us; but then is this through not seeing revered men like 
yourself, or that which, in this matter, is dhamma V 99 

“ Good Udena, these words spoken to me are certainly helpful. 
There is a going forth under dhamma , or so it (now) seems to me, and 
so may the good Udena understand me. But it would be good if, 
out of compassion, the good Udena would explain to me in full these 
four kinds of persons that he has spoken of in brief but not explained 
in full.” 

“ Well then, brahman, listen, attend carefully and I will speak.’* 

“ Yes, sir,” the brahman Gho^amukha answered the venerable 
Udena in assent. The venerable Udena spoke thus : 

“ And which, brahman, is the person who torments self and is 
intent on the practice of self-torment ? Here, brahman, some person 
is unclothed, flouting life’s decencies . . , x [162] . . . This, brahman, is 
called the person who is neither a self-tormentor intent on the 
practice of -tormenting self, nor a tormentor of others intent on 
the practice of tormenting others. He, neither a self-tormentor nor 
a tormentor of others, is here-now allayed, quenched, become cool, 
an experiencer of bliss that lives with self Brahma-become.” 

When this had been said Ghotamukha the brahman spoke thus, to 
the venerable Udena : 

“ Excellent, good Udena, excellent, good Udena. It is as if one 
might set upright what had been upset,? or might disclose what was 
covered, or show the way to one who had gone astray, or bring an 

1 As at M . i. 343 to 349; see above, p. 7 to p. 14. 

• From here to the second request to be accepted as a lay disciple, cf. M . 
ii. 90. 



II. 162-163 


353 


With Ghotamukha 

oil-lamp into the darkness so that those with vision might see material 
shapes — even so in many a figure has dhamma been made clear by 
the revered Udena. Thus I am going to the revered Udena for 
refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. May the revered 
Udena accept me as a lay-follower going for refuge from today forth 
for as long as life lasts.” 

“ But do not you, brahman, go for refuge to me. You must go 
only to that Lord for refuge to whom I have gone for refuge.” 

“ But where, good Udena, is this revered Gotama staying now, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One ?” 

“ Brahman, this Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, 
has now attained final nibbana.” 

“ Good Udena, if we should hear that that honoured 1 Gotama 
were ten . . . twenty . . . thirty . . . forty . . , fifty yojana distant, we 
should go the fifty yojana so as to see that honoured Gotama, 
perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, And, [163] good Udena, 
even if we heard that the honoured Gotama, perfected one, fully 
Self- Awakened One were a hundred yojana distant, we should go the 
hundred yojana so as to see that honoured Gotama, perfected one, 
fully Self-Awakened One. But, good Udena, since that revered 2 
Gotama has attained final nibbana, we are going for refuge to that 
honoured Gotama who has attained final nibbana and to dhamma 
and to the Order of monks. May the revered Udena accept me as 
a lay-follower going for refuge from today forth for as long as life 
lasts. And, good Udena, the king of Anga daily gives me a regular 
supply of alms, 3 so I am giving the good Udena one of these regular 
supplies of alms,” 

“ But what, brahman, does the king of Anga give you daily as a 
regular supply of alms ?” 

“ Five hundred kahdpana , good Udena.” 

“ But, brahman, it is not allowable for us to receive gold and 
silver.” 4 

“ If it is not allowable to the good Udena, I will have a dwelling- 
place built for the good Udena.” 

“ If you, brahman, wish to have a dwelling-place built for me, do 
have an assembly hall built for the Order at Pafadiputta.” 

“ I am even more delighted and pleased with the good Udena that 
he urges me to make a gift to the Order. So I, good Udena, will 

1 bhavantarh. * bhavarh . 

3 niccabhikkha , alms as a permanent or constant gift. 

4 Nissag. XVIII, see Vin. iii. 236 ff . 



354 94. Ghotamukhasutta II. 163-164 

have an assembly hall built for the Order at Pataliputta from this 
regular supply of alms and from subsequent supplies of alms.” 

Then Ghotamukha the brahman from this regular supply of alms 
and from subsequent supplies of alms had an assembly hall built for 
the Order at Pataliputta. At the present time it is called Ghofa- 
mukhL 

Discourse with Ghotamukha: 

The Fourth 


95. DISCOURSE WITH CANKI 1 

(Canklsutta) 

[164] Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord, walking on tour 
among the Kosalans together with a large Order of monks, arrived at 
a brahman village of the Kosalans called Opasada. While he was 
there near Opasada the Lord stayed to the north of Opasada in the 
Bevas* Grove, the Sal Grove. 2 At that time in Opasada — a place 
teeming with life, place of) grass, wood and water and of com, in 
fief to the King — there dwelt the brahman Canki as overlord, on a 
royal gift, a gift with full powers 3 4 that had been made to him by King 
Pasenadi of Kosala. Then the brahman householders of Opasada 
heard: “Verily the recluse Gotama . . A . . Good indeed is the 
sight of perfected ones such as this.” Then the brahman house- 
holders of Opasada, having set forth from Opasada, went in com- 
panies, crowds and groups by the northern entrance to the Devas* 
Grove, the Sal Grove. At that time the brahman Canki was lying 
down in the upper part of the palace during the heat of the day. And 
the brahman Canki saw the brahman householders of Opasada who, 

1 This Discourse, which should be compared with the Sonadanda Sutiania 
at D. i. Ill might be called “ prompted by Canki,” the main part being 
delivered not to him but to Kapathika. Cf . Jf. Sta. 51. 

2 MA. iii. 414; it is said that oblations were offered here to the devas. 

3 brakmadeyya . MA . iii. 455 explains as sefthadeyya, the best gift; and 
then says: “having raised the parasol, it was to be enjoyed as if he were 
a king; once given, this gift could not be taken back again.” (7/. D . i. 87 
for this description of a royal gift, and see Dial , i. 108, ». 1. 

4 As at M . ii. 54-55 (above, p. 251), substituting Opasada for Thulla- 
kotthita. 



II. 164-165 


With Cankl 


355 


having set forth from Opasada, were going in companies, crowds and 
groups by the northern entrance to the Devas’ Grove, the Sal Grove ; 
and seeing them, he addressed an adviser, saying: 

“ Why, good adviser, do the brahman householders of Opasada, 
having set forth from Opasada, go in companies, crowds and groups 
by the northern entrance to the Devas* Grove, the Sal Grove V* 

“ There is, good Canki, the recluse Gotama, a son of the Sakyans, 
gone forth from a Sakyan family . . . 1 . . . an Awakened One, a Lord. 
These are approaching this honoured Gotama.” 

“ Well then, good adviser, approach the brahman householders of 
Opasada; having approached, speak thus to the brahman house- 
holders of Opasada: 1 Sirs, the brahman Cankl speaks thus: Please 
let the revered ones wait; Cankl the brahman will also approach to 
see the recluse Gotama.* ** 

“ Yes, sir,” and when that adviser had answered the brahman 
Canki [ 168 ] in assent, he approached the brahman householders of 
Opasada; having approached, he spoke thus to the brahman house- 
holders of Opasada: “ Sirs, the brahman Canki speaks thus: Please 
let the revered ones wait; Canki the brahman will also approach to 
see the recluse Gotama.** 

Now at that time at least five hundred brahmans from various 
brahman districts 2 were residing at Opasada on some business or 
other. These brahmans heard that the brahman Canki would 
approach to see the recluse Gotama. Then these brahmans 
approached the brahman Canki; having approached, they spoke thus 
to the brahman Canki: “ Is it indeed true that the good Canki will 
approach to see the recluse Gotama ?** 

44 That is my intention, 3 sirs; I will approach to see the recluse 
Gotama.’* 

44 Do not, good Canki, approach to see the recluse Gotama. It is 
not right 4 that the good Canki should approach to see the recluse 
Gotama; it is right that the recluse Gotama should himself approach 
to see the honoured Canki. For the good Canki is of pure birth on 
both sides, of pure descent from his mother and father back through 
seven generations, unchallenged, irreproachable in respect of birth. 5 
And because the good Canki is of pure birth on both sides . . . 


1 As at M. ii. 55, above, p. 251. 

2 Lit. kingdoms, rajja ; MA. iii. 416 instances Kasi and Kosala. 

3 evam kho me bho hoti , lit. it is thus by me. 4 na arahati, not fit. 

* Stock. See under akkhitta (unchallenged) in PTC . Cf. J D. i. 120 for 

five things that brahmans declare make a brahman. 



356 


95. CankmUta 


II. 165-166 


irreproachable in respect of birth, this is a reason why it is not right 
for the good Cankl to approach to see the recluse Gotama ; it is right 
that the recluse Gotama should himself approach to see the honoured 
Cankl. For the good Cankl is prosperous, very wealthy, very rich. 
Then the good Cankl is master of the three Vedas, versed in the 
vocabularies and rituals together with the phonology and exegesis 
and the legendary tradition as the fifth; he is learned in idioms, a 
grammarian, proficient in popular philosophy and the marks of a 
Great Man. Then the good Cankl is lovely, good to look upon, 
charming, possessed of the greatest beauty of complexion, of a 
sublime colour, 1 a sublime stature, 2 stately in appearance. Then the 
good Canki is of moral habit, one who has grown in moral habit, he is 
possessed 3 of a moral habit that has grown. 4 * Then the good Cankl 
has a lovely voice, a lovely [ 166 ] delivery, he is possessed of urbane 
speech, distinct, not mumbling, he is able to make his meaning clear. 
Then the good Cankl, the teacher of many teachers, instructs three 
hundred brahman youths in mantras. Then the good Cankl is 
respected, revered, esteemed, venerated by King Pasenadi of Kosala. 
Then the good Cankl is respected . . . venerated by the brahman 
Pokkharasati. 6 Then the good Cankl dwells as overlord in Opasada 
— a place teeming with life, (a place of) grass, wood and water ... on 
a royal gift, a gift with full powers that has been made to him by 
King Pasenadi of Kosala. And because the good Cankl dwells as 
overlord ... on a gift with full powers that has been made to him by 
King Pasenadi of Kosala, this is a reason why it is not right for the 
good Cankl to approach to see the recluse Gotama; it is right that the 
recluse Gotama should himself approach to see the honoured Cankl.” 

When this had been said, the brahman Cankl spoke thus to those 
brahmans: 

“ Well then, sirs, hear from me why it is right that we ourselves 
should go to see the honoured Gotama and why it is not right that 
the revered Gotama should himself come to see us. Indeed, sirs, 
the recluse Gotama is of pure birth on both sides, of pure descent 


1 brahmavanrii, with the best golden colour of the pure castes, MA. iii. 418. 

* brahmavaccasl . MA. iii. 418 says his body is like that of Maha-Brahma — 
one of the marks of a Great Man (see Sta. 91). 

3 M A. iii. 418 gives yutta, intent on, in explanation of text’s samannagata , 
possessed of. 

4 MA. iii. 418 says that these last two attributes are synonymous. 

* A very rich brahman, evidently also of spiritual integrity. See M. 

Sta. 99. 



II. 166-167 


With Canki 


357 


from his mother and father back through seven generations, un- 
challenged, irreproachable in respect of birth. And because the 
recluse Gotama is of pure birth on both sides . . . irreproachable in 
respect of birth, this is a reason why it is not right for the good 
Gotama to come to see us, while it is right that we ourselves should 
go to see the honoured Gotama. Indeed the recluse Gotama has 
gone forth giving up an abundance of unwrought and wrought gold 1 
both in the ground and above it. 2 Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama 
while he was a young man with lovely coal-black hair, endowed with 
radiant youth, in the prime of his life, went forth from home into 
homelessness. Indeed, sirs, although his parents were unwilling 
and tears poured down their cheeks the recluse Gotama, having cut 
off his hair and beard and donned saffron robes, went forth from 
home into homelessness. Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama is lovely, 
good to look upon, charming, possessed of the greatest beauty of 
complexion, [167] of a sublime colour, a sublime stature, stately in 
appearance. Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama is of moral habit, one 
who is ariyan in moral habit, one who is skilled in moral habit, 
possessed of a moral habit that is skilled. Indeed, sirs, the recluse 
Gotama has a lovely voice, a lovely delivery, he is possessed of 
urbane speech, distinct, not mumbling, he is able to make his 
meaning clear. Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama is the teacher of 
many teachers. Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama has destroyed 
attachment to sense-pleasures, has put away frivolity. 3 Indeed, 
sirs, the recluse Gotama teaches kamma , teaches effective kamma , 4 * 
desiring no evil for the brahman race. 6 Indeed, sirs, the recluse 
Gotama has gone forth from a distinguished family, a leading noble 
family. 6 Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama has gone forth from a 
prosperous family, very wealthy, very rich. Indeed, sirs, (people) 
come from distant kingdoms, distant regions to question the recluse 
Gotama. Indeed, sirs, various thousands of devatas have gone to the 
recluse Gotama for refuge for breathing things. Indeed, sirs, a 
lovely report has gone abroad concerning the recluse Gotama: He 


1 On hiraiinasuvanna see B.D. i. 28, n. 1. * See B.D. i. 79, n. 6. 

* capalla. At AT. i. 470, Vbh. 351, Vism. 106 cdpalya . 

4 kammavadl Hriyavadi . 

6 MA. iii. 422 says that Sariputta, Moggallana, Mahakassapa and so on 

belong to this race. * Brahman ’ is therefore taken in the Buddhist sense 
above. 

• adinalchattiyakula. On adlna in this compound see Dial. i. 148, n. 2. 
Cf. ddinamana8o at 8 . v. 74 and see K.8. V. 61, n. 5. 



358 


95. Cahldsutta 


II. 167-168 


is indeed Lord, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, endowed with 
knowledge and (right) conduct, Well-farer, knower of the worlds, the 
matchless charioteer of men to be tamed, teacher of dews and man- 
kind, the Awakened One, the Lord. Indeed, sirs, the recluse Gotama 
is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man. Indeed, sirs, 
King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha with his wife and children has 
gone to the recluse Gotama for refuge for breathing things. Indeed, 
sirs, King Pasenadi of Kosala with his wife and children has gone to 
the recluse Gotama for refuge for breathing things. Indeed, sirs, 
the brahman Pokkharasati with his wife and children has’gone to the 
recluse Gotama for refuge for breathing things. Indeed, sirs, the 
recluse Gotama has arrived at Opasada and is staying near Opasada, 
to the north, in the Devas’ Grove, the Sal Grove. Whatever recluses 
and brahmans come to our villages or fields, they are our guests. And 
guests must be revered, reverenced, esteemed, honoured by us. So, 
sirs, because the recluse Gotama has arrived at Opasada and is 
staying near Opasada, to the north, in the Devas’ Grove, the Sal 
Grove, the recluse Gotama is our guest. The guest must be revered, 
reverenced, esteemed and honoured by us. [168] This too is a reason 
why it is not right that the revered Gotama should come and see us. 
But it is right that we ourselves should go and see the honoured 
Gotama. To this extent I, sirs, know the good Gotama’s splendour, 1 
but this is not the (full) extent of the good Gotama’s splendour — 
immeasurable is the splendour of the good Gotama. It is not right 
that the good Gotama, possessed as he is of each one of these qualities, 
should come to see us. But it is right that we ourselves should go 
to see the honoured Gotama. Well then, sirs, all of us will go our- 
selves to see the recluse Gotama.” 

Then the brahman Canki together with a large group of brahmans 
approached the Lord; having approached, he exchanged greetings 
with the Lord ; and having conversed in a friendly and courteous way, 
he sat down at a respectful distance. Now at that time the Lord was 
sitting down talking in a courteous way on this topic and that with 
a number of venerable brahmans. Now at that time a brahman 
youth called Kapathika, young, with shaven head, sixteen years of 
age since his birth, master of the three Vedas, versed in the vocabul- 
aries and rituals together with the phonology and exegesis with the 
legendary tradition as the fifth, learned in the idioms, a grammarian, 
proficient in popular philosophy and the marks of a Great Man, was 


1 vanna as at end of M. Sta. 66. 



II. 168—169 


With Cahki 


359 


sitting down in that company. At intervals he interrupted the 
conversation that the Lord was holding with the venerable brahmans. 
Then the Lord reprimanded the brahman youth Kapathika, saying: 
“ Do not let the venerable Bharadvaja interrupt at intervals the 
conversation being held with the venerable brahmans: let the 
venerable Bharadvaja wait until the end of the conversation.” 
When this had been said the brahman Cahki spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ Do not let the good Gotama reprimand the brahman youth 
Kapathika. The brahman youth Kapathika is a young man of a 
respectable family, and the brahman youth Kapathika is very 
learned, and the brahman youth Kapathika has a lovely delivery, 
and clever is the brahman youth Kapathika, and the brahman youth 
Kapathika is capable of arguing about this speech together with the 
good Gotama.” 

Then it occurred to the Lord: “Certainly, [169] the brahmar* 
youth Kapathika must be ‘ finished 51 in the threefold Vedic lore 
since brahmans honour him.” Then it occurred to the brahman 
youth Kapathika: “ If the recluse Gotama catches my eye, then I 
will ask the recluse Gotama a question.” Then the Lord, knowing 
with his mind the reasoning in the mind of the brahman youth 
Kapathika, caught his eye. Then it occurred to the brahman youth 
Kapathika : “ The recluse Gotama is paying respect to me. Suppose 
I were to ask the recluse Gotama a question ?” Then the brahman 
youth Kapathika spoke thus to the Lord : “ Good Gotama, that which 
is an ancient mantra 2 of the brahmans according to hearsay and 
tradition, according to the authority of the collections 3 and in regard 
to which brahmans inevitably come to the conclusion : ‘ This alone 
is the truth, all else is falsehood 9 — what does the good Gotama say 
about this V 9 

“ But, Bharadvaja, is there even one brahman among them who 
speaks thus: * I know this, I see this: this alone is the truth, all else 
is falsehood 9 V 9 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

“ But, Bharadvaja, is there even one teacher of brahmans, even 

1 katam , in the sense of perfect, finished, and therefore master; c/. kalamlca - 
rariiyarh where katam means both ‘ ended ’ or * concluded ’ and ‘ concluded 
well or properly thus finished (as ended) and finished (as in 44 a finished 
product ”). 

3 mantapada. MA . iii. 424 says this as well as manta means Veda. Some 
of the seers mentioned below have Vedic verses traditionally ascribed to them. 
See B.D . iv. 337. 

3 Cf. M. i. 520. 



360 


95. Canklsutta 


II. 169-170 


one teacher of teachers back through seven generations of teachers 
who speaks thus: ‘ I know this, I see this; this alone is the truth, all 
else is falsehood ’ V 9 

" No, good Gotama,” 

“ But, Bharadvaja, those who were formerly seers of the brah- 
mans, 1 * makers of mantras , preservers of mantras , whose ancient 
mantras* as sung, taught and composed the brahmans of today still 
sing, still speak ; they still speak what was spoken, they still teach 
what was taught — that is to say (by) Atthaka, Vamaka, Vamadeva, 
Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bharadvaja, Vasettha, Kassapa, 
Bhagu — do even these speak thus: ‘ We know this, we see this: this 
alone is the truth, all else is falsehood ’ 1” 

[170] “ No, good Gotama.” 

“ So it comes to this, Bharadvaja: there is not a single brahman 
who speaks thus to a brahman: * I know this ... all else is falsehood.’ 
There is not a single teacher of brahmans, not a single teacher of 
teachers back through seven generations of teachers who speaks thus : 

* I know this ... all else is falsehood.’ And those who were formerly 
seers of the brahmans, makers of mantras . , . that is to say (by) 
Atthaka . . . Bhagu, not even these speak thus: 4 We know this, we 
see this: this alone is the truth, all else is falsehood.’ Bharadvaja, 
it is like a string of blind men 3 holding on to one another — neither 
does the foremost one see, nor does the middle one see, nor does 
the hindmost one see. Even so, methinks, Bharadvaja, do the 
words of the brahmans turn out to resemble a string of blind men: 
neither does the foremost one see nor does the middle one see nor 
does the hindmost one see. What do you think about this, Bharad- 
vaja ? This being so, does not the faith of the brahmans turn out to 
be groundless 1” 

“ But, good Gotama, brahmans do not merely go by 4 faith in this 
matter; brahmans also go by report.” 

“ First you, Bharadvaja, set off about faith, now you are speaking 
of report. These five things, Bharadvaja, have a twofold maturing 5 
here-now. What five ? Faith, inclination, report, consideration of 
reasons, reflection on and approval of an opinion. 6 These, Bharad- 

1 Down to the name Bhagu cf. Vin , i. 245; Z>. i, 104, 238, 242; A . iii. 224, 

229; M . ii. 200. 

1 See note 2 on previous page. 3 As at M . ii. 200, D. i. 239. 

4 payirupasanti , to pay homage, usually with the acc. 

5 MA. iii. 426 says a maturing that has been and that has not (yet) been. 

• On the five also see S. ii. 115, iv. 138. Cf. A . i. 190, ii. 191. 



II. 170-172 


With Canki 


361 


vaja, are the five things having a twofold maturing here-now. More- 
over, Bharadvaja, even although something be thoroughly believed 
in, it may be empty, void, false; on the other hand, something not 
thoroughly believed in may be fact, truth, not otherwise. Moreover, 
[171] Bharadvaja, even although something may be thoroughly 
inclined towards . . . well reported . . . well considered . . . well 
reflected upon, it may be empty, void, false ; on the other hand, even 
although something is not well reflected upon, it may be fact, truth, 
not otherwise. Preserving a truth, Bharadvaja, is not enough for 
an intelligent man inevitably to come to the conclusion: 4 This alone 
the truth, all else is falsehood. 1 ” 

44 But to what extent, good Gotama, is there preservation of a 
truth ? To what extent does one preserve a truth % We are asking 
the honoured Gotama about preservation of a truth.” 

44 Bharadvaja, if a man has faith and says: 4 Such is my faith,’ 
speaking thus he preserves a truth, but not yet does he inevitably 
come to the conclusion : 4 This alone is the truth, all else is falsehood.’ 
To this extent, Bharadvaja, is there preservation of a truth, to this 
extent does one preserve a truth, and it is to this extent that we lay 
down the preservation of a truth; but not yet is there awakening to 
truth. And if, Bharadvaja, a man has an inclination ... a report . . . 
a consideration of reasons ... a reflection on and approval of an 
opinion and says: 4 Such is my reflection on and approval of the 
opinion,’ speaking thus he preserves a truth, but not yet does he 
inevitably come to the conclusion: 4 This alone is the truth, all else is 
falsehood.’ To this extent, Bharadvaja, is there preservation of a 
truth, to this extent does one preserve a truth, and it is to this extent 
that we lay down the preservation of a truth; but not yet is there 
awakening to truth.” 

“ To this extent, good Gotama, is there preservation of a truth,, 
to this extent one preserves a truth, to this extent do we behold the 
preservation of a truth. But to what extent, good Gotama, is there 
awakening to truth % To what extent does one awaken to truth % 

We are asking the honoured Gotama about awakening to truth ” 

44 As to this, Bharadvaja, suppose a monk is living depending on a 
village or market town ; a householder or a householder’s son, having 
approached him, examines him concerning three states : [172] states of 
greed, states of aversion and states of confusion. 1 He thinks: 4 Does 
the venerable one have such states of greed that, his mind obsessed by 


1 CJ. A . i. 190/. 



362 


9 5. Canklsutta 


II, 172-173 


such states of greed, although not knowing, he would say, “ I know/’ 
or although not seeing, he would say, “I see,” or would he incite 
another to such a course as for a long time would be for his woe and 
ill V While examining him, he knows thus; ‘ This venerable one 
does not have such states of greed that, his mind obsessed by such 
states of greed, while not knowing he would say, “ I know,” or while 
not seeing he would say, “ I see,” nor would he incite another to such 
a course as would be for a long time for his woe and ill.’ As is that 
venerable one’s conduct of body, as is his conduct of speech, so is it 
not that of a greedy person. And when this venerable one teaches 
dhamma , that dhamma is deep, difficult to see, difficult to understand, 
peaceful, excellent, beyond dialectic, subtle, intelligible to the wise; 
it is not a dhamma that could be well taught by a greedy person. 

After examining him and beholding that he is purified of states of 
greed, then he examines him further on states of aversion. He 
thinks; * Now, does this venerable one have such states of aversion 
that, his mind obsessed ... or would he incite another to such a 
course as for a long time would be for his woe and ill V ... As is that 
venerable one’s conduct of body ... of speech, so is it not that of a 
person with aversion. And when this venerable one is teaching 
dhamma ... it is not a dhamma that could be well taught by a person 
with aversion. 

After examining him and beholding that he is purified of states of 
aversion, [173] then he examines him further on states of confusion. 
He thinks ; 4 Now, does this venerable one have such states of confusion 
that, his mind obsessed ... it is not a dhamma that could be well 
taught by a confused person.’ 

After examining him and beholding that he is purified of states of 
confusion, then he reposes faith in him; with faith born he draws 
close; 1 drawing close he sits down near by; sitting down near by he 
lends ear; lending ear he hears dhamma ; having heard dhamma he 
remembers it; he tests the meaning of the things he remembers; 
while testing the meaning the things are approved of; if there is 
approval of the things desire is born ; with desire born he makes an 
effort; having made an effort he weighs it up; having weighed it up 
he strives; being self-resolute he realises with his person the highest 
truth itself; and penetrating it by means of intuitive wisdom, he 

1 The text reads saddhajato upasamkamanto payirupasati. But to agree 
with the manner of the wording in the rest of the passage, I think upasamka- 
mati should be inserted after saddhajato as at M. i. 480. Otherwise these two 
passages are similar. 



II. 173-174 


With Cahkl 


363 


sees. It is to this extent, Bharadvaja, that there is an awakening 
to truth; it is to this extent that one awakens to truth; it is to this 
extent that we lay down an awakening to truth; but not yet is there 
attainment of truth.” 

“ To this extent, good Gotama, is there awakening to truth, to 
this extent does one awaken to truth, and to this extent do we 
behold an awakening to truth. But to what extent, good Gotama, is 
there attainment of truth ? To what extent does one attain truth ? 
We are asking the honoured Gotama about attainment of truth.” 

[174] “ There is attainment of truth, Bharadvaja, by following, 
developing and continually practising these things themselves. To 
this extent, Bharadvaja, is there attainment of truth, to this extent 
does one attain truth, and to this extent do we lay down the attain- 
ment of truth.” 

“ To this extent, good Gotama, is there attainment of truth, to 
this extent does one attain truth, and to this extent do we behold the 
attainment of truth. But what thing, good Gotama, is of much 
service in the attainment of truth ? We are asking the honoured 
Gotama about a thing that is of much service in the attainment of 
truth.” 

“ Striving, Bharadvaja, is of much service in the attainment of 
truth; for whoso should not strive after truth would not attain it; 
but if he strives, then he attains truth; therefore striving is of much 
service in the attainment of truth.” 

11 But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to striving ? 
We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is of much 
service to striving.” 

“ Weighing (things up), Bharadvaja, is of much service to striving ; 
for whoso should not weigh (things up) would not strive; but if he 
weighs up, then he strives; therefore weighing up is of much service 
to striving.” 

4 4 But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to weighing 
up ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is of 

much service to weighing up.” 

“ Making an effort, Bharadvaja, is of much service to weighing up ; 
for whoso should not make an effort would not weigh up ; but if he 
makes an effort, then he weighs up; therefore making an effort is of 
much service to weighing up.” 

44 But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to making an 
effort ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is 
of much service to making an effort.” 



364 


95. Cankisutta 


II. 174-175 


“Desire, Bharadvaja, is of much service to making an effort; 
should desire for it not be born, one could not make an effort for it; 
but if desire is born, then he makes an effort; therefore desire is of 
much service to making an effort.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to desire ? 
[ 175 ] We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is of 
much service to desire.” 

“ Approving of the things, Bharadvaja, is of much service to 
desire ; should the things not be approved of, desire for them could 
not be born ; but if there is approval of the things, then desire is born ; 
therefore approval of the things is of much service to desire.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to (reflection 
on and) approval of the things ? We are asking the honoured 
Gotama about a thing that is of much service to (reflection on and) 
approval of the things.” 

“ Testing the meaning, Bharadvaja, is of much service to reflection 
on and approval of the things. If one did not test that meaning, 
the things could not seem right for this reflection; but if one tests the 
meaning, then the things seem right for reflection; therefore testing 
the meaning is of much service to reflection on and approval of the 
things.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to testing the 
meaning ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that 
is of much service to testing the meaning.” 

“ Remembering dhamma, Bharadvaja, is of much service to 
testing the meaning; for whoso should not remember that dhamma 
could not test that meaning; but if he remembers dhamma , then he 
tests the meaning ; therefore remembering dhamma is of much service 
to testing the meaning.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to remembering 
dhamma ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is 
of much service to remembering dhamma .” 

“ Hearing dhamma , Bharadvaja, is of much service to remembering 
dhamma . Whoso should not hear that dhamma could not remember 
that dhamma ; but if he hears dhamma , then he remembers dhamma , l 
therefore hearing dhamma is of much service to remembering 
dhamma .” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to heaping 


1 Text reads: yasma ca kho dhammarh dhareti , instead of, as would seem 
more correct, yasma ca kho dhammarh sunati tasma dhammarh dhareti. 



II. 175-177 With Cahki 365 

dhamma ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that 
is of much service to hearing dhamma ” 

“ Lending ear, Bharadvaja, is of much service to hearing dhamma ; 
[176] for whoso should not lend ear to it could not hear this dhamma ; 
but if he lends ear, then he hears dhamma ; therefore lending ear is of 
much service to hearing dhamma ” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to lending ear ? 
We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is of much 
service to lending ear.” 

“ Drawing close, Bharadvaja, is of much service to lending ear; 
for whoso should not draw close to him could not lend ear to him ; 
but if he draws close, then he lends ear; therefore drawing close is of 
much service to lending ear.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to drawing 
close ? We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is 
of much service to drawing close.” 

“ Approaching, Bharadvaja, is of much service to drawing close; 
for whoso should not approach him could not draw close to him; 
but if he approaches, then he draws close ; therefore approaching is of 
much service to drawing close.” 

“ But what thing, good Gotama, is of much service to approaching ? 
We are asking the honoured Gotama about a thing that is of much 
service to approaching.” 

“ Faith, Bharadvaja, is of much service to approaching; for should 
faith in him not be born, one could not approach him; but if faith is 
bom, then he approaches; therefore faith is of much service to 
approaching.” 

“ We asked the honoured Gotama about the preservation of truth; 
the good Gotama explained the preservation of truth; and we 
approved of it and were pleased, and so we are delighted. We 
asked the honoured Gotama about awakening to truth; the good 
Gotama explained ... we are delighted. We asked the honoured 
Gotama about the attainment of truth . . . We asked the honoured 
Gotama about a thing that is of much service to the attainment of 
truth . . . [177] we are delighted. Whatever it was that we asked 
the honoured Gotama, that very thing the good Gotama explained; 
and we approved of it and were pleased, and so we are delighted. 
For, formerly, good Gotama, we used to know (a distinction) thus: 

4 And who are these little shaveling recluses, menials, black, off- 
scourings of our Kinsman’s heels I 1 And who are the knowers of 

t Ag at M L 334 . gee m LJS. i. 397’ " ~~ 



366 


95. CanJdsutta 


II. 177-178 


dhamma ?’* Indeed the good Gotama has aroused in me a recluse’s 
regard 2 for recluses, a recluse’s satisfaction in recluses, a recluse’s 
respect for recluses. It is excellent, good Gotama, it is excellent, 
good Gotama . . . May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple 
going for refuge from this day forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse with Canki: 

The Fifth 


96. DISCOURSE WITH ESUKlRl 

(Esukarisutta) 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near Savatthi 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s monastery. Then the brah- 
man Esukari approached the Lord ; having approached, he exchanged 
greetings with the Lord, and having conversed in a friendly and 
courteous way, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was 
sitting down at a respectful distance, Esukarfthe brahman spoke thus 
to the Lord: 

“ Brahmans, good Gotama, lay down four (types of) service: they 
lay down service for a brahman, they lay down service for a noble, 
they lay down service for a merchant, they lay down service for a 
worker. As to this, good Gotama, brahmans lay down service for 
a brahman, saying: ‘ A brahman may serve a brahman, or a noble 
may serve a brahman, or a merchant may serve a brahman, or a 
worker may serve a brahman/ This is the [178] service, good 
Gotama, that brahmans lay down for a brahman. As to this, good 
Gotama, brahmans lay down service for a noble, saying: ‘ A noble 
may serve a noble or a merchant may serve a noble or a worker may 
serve a noble/ This is the service, good Gotama, that brahmans lay 
down for a noble. As to this, good Gotama, brahmans lay down 
service for a merchant, saying: ‘ A merchant may serve a merchant 
or a worker may serve a merchant/ This is the service, good Gotama, 
that brahmans lay down for a merchant. As to this, good Gotama, 
brahmans lay down service for a worker, saying: ‘ A worker may 
serve a worker. For who else could serve a worker V This is the 


i Cf. M. i. 480. 


* pema, liking, affection. 



II. 178-179 


With Esukari 


367 


service, good Gotama, that brahmans lay down for a worker. 
Brahmans, good Gotama, lay down these four (types of) service. 
What does the good Gotama say about this V * 

“ But, brahman, does everyone agree with the brahmans when 
they lay down these four (types of) service V 9 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

“ Like a poor needy destitute man 1 on whom they might force 
a morsel (of meat although) he did not want it, saying: ‘ You must 
eat this meat, my good man, and you must hand over a price for it 
as well * — even so, brahman, do the brahmans — and moreover without 
the assent of recluses and brahmans— lay down these four (types of) 
service. I, brahman, do not say that everyone should serve. But, 
brahman, I do not say that everyone should not serve. For if, 
brahman, there is a servitor who is worse for his service, not better, 
I do not say that he should serve. But if, brahman, there is a 
servitor who is better for his service, not worse, I say that he should 
serve. And if, brahman, one should ask a noble, saying: 4 Is your 
servitor worse, not better, as a result of his service ; or is your servitor, 
better, not worse, as a result of his service ? And so which one 
should you be served by V — then the noble, [179] brahman, in 
replying rightly would reply thus: * The servitor who is worse, not 
better, as a result of serving me — I should not be served by him. 
But the servitor who is better, not worse, as a result of serving me 
— I should be served by him/ 

And if, brahman, one should ask a brahman ... a merchant ... a 
worker, saying: ‘ Is your servitor worse , . . (as above) . . / . But 

the servitor who is better, not worse, as a result of serving me — I 
should be served by him/ 

I, brahman, do not speak of * better * because of birth in a high- 
class family, 2 But, brahman, I do not speak of * worse * because of 
birth in a high-class family. I, brahman, do not speak of ‘ better 9 
because of splendour of complexion. 3 But, brahman, I do not 
speak of ‘ worse * because of splendour of complexion. I, brahman, 

do not speak of ‘ better ’ because of splendour of possessions , 4 But 
I, brahman, do not speak of ‘ worse ’ because of splendour of 
possessions. For, as to this, brahman, someone from a high-class 


1 As at A, iii. 384. See also M , i. 460. 

* MA . iii. 428, noble and brahman. 

3 MA, iii. 428, even a merchant has a splendid complexion. 

4 MA . iii. 428, even a worker, indeed even a member of a despised class, 
may have splendid possessions. 



368 


96, Esukdrisutta 


II. 179-180 


family makes onslaught on creatures, takes what has not been given, 
wrongly enjoys pleasures of the senses, is a liar, of slanderous speech, 
of harsh speech, a gossip, covetous, malevolent in mind, of wrong 
view. Therefore I do not speak of 6 better ’ because of birth in a 
high-class family. But, as to this, brahman, someone from a high- 
class family may refrain from onslaught on creatures, from taking 
what has not been given, from wrongly enjoying pleasures of the 
senses, from lying, from slanderous speech, from harsh speech, from 
gossiping, and be not covetous, not malevolent in mind, of right 
view. Therefore I do speak of 4 worse ' because of birth in a high- 
class family. As to this, brahman, someone with splendour of 
complexion . . . with splendour of possessions makes onslaught on 
creatures ... is of wrong view. Therefore I do not speak of 4 better * 
because of splendour of possessions. But, as to this, brahman, 
someone with splendour of possessions refrains from onslaught on 
creatures ... is of right view. Therefore [180] I do not speak of 
4 worse * because of splendour of possessions. I, brahman, do not 
say that everyone should serve. But, brahman, I do not say that 
everyone should not serve. That servitor, brahman, in whom as a 
result of his service faith grows, moral habit grows, learning grows, 
renunciation grows, wisdom grows, 1 I say of him that he should 
serve.” 

When this had been said, Esukarl the brahman spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

“Brahmans, good Gotama, lay down four (types of) treasure: 2 
they lay down a brahman's wealth, 3 they lay down a noble's wealth, 
they lay down a merchant’s wealth, they lay down a worker's wealth. 
In regard to this, good Gotama, brahmans lay down that a brahman's 
wealth is walking for alms. 4 But, on despising the wealth of walking 
for alms, a brahman is one who does not meet his obligations and is 
like a guardian taking what has not been given. This, good Gotama, 
is how brahmans lay down a brahman’s wealth. In regard to this, 
good Gotama, brahmans lay down that a noble's wealth is the bow 
and quiver. But, on despising the wealth of bow and quiver, a 
noble is one who does not meet his obligations and is like a guardian 
taking what has not been given. This, good Gotama, is how brah- 

1 At A . iii. 80=5. iv. 260 these five ways of growing constitute ariyan 
growth. 

* dhana . 8 sandhana , assets, resources, belongings. 

* Even if a brahman is very rich he should walk for alms as did at one time 
the rich brahmans of old, MA . iii. 428. 



II. 180-181 


With Esukari 


369 


mans lay down a noble’s wealth. In regard to this, good Gotama, 
brahmans lay down that a merchant’s 1 wealth is agriculture and 
cow-keeping. 8 But, on despising the wealth of agriculture and cow- 
keeping, a merchant is one who does not meet his obligations and is 
like a guardian taking what has not been given. This, good Gotama, 
is how brahmans lay down a merchant’s wealth. In regard to this, 
good Gotama, brahmans lay down that a worker’s wealth is the 
sickle and pingo. But, on despising the wealth of sickle and pingo, 
a worker is one who does not meet his obligations and is like a 
guardian taking what has not been given. This, good Gotama, is 
how brahmans lay down a worker’s wealth. Brahmans, good 
Gotama, lay down these four (types of) treasure. What does the 
good Gotama say about this ?” 

“ But, brahman, does everyone agree with the brahmans when 
they lay down these four (types of) treasure ?” 

[181] “ No, good Gotama.” 

“ Like a poor needy destitute man on whom they might force a 
morsel . . . (as above) . . . even so do brahmans . . . lay down these four 
(types of) treasure. Now I, brahman, lay down that a man’s 
wealth is dhamma , ariyan, supermundane. On recollecting his 
ancient family lineage on his maternal and paternal sides, 2 wherever 
it is that there is the production of an individuality, 3 it is reckoned in 
accordance with that. So, if there is the production of an individ- 
uality in a noble family, it is reckoned as a noble. If there is the 
production of an individuality in a brahman family, it is reckoned 
as a brahman. If there is the production of an individuality in a 
merchant family ... in a worker family, it is reckoned as a merchant 
... a worker. As a fire, brahman, no matter on account of what 
condition it bums, is reckoned precisely as that: if the fire burns 
because of dry sticks it is reckoned as a dry stick fire ; if the fire burns 
because of chips . . . grass . . . cowdung it is reckoned as a fire of chips 
. . . grass . . . cowdung — even so, brahman, do I lay down that a 
man’s wealth is dhamma , ariyan, supermundane. On recollecting 
his ancient family lineage on his maternal and paternal sides, 
wherever it is that there is the production of an individuality, it 
is reckoned in accordance with that. So, if there is the production of 
an individuality in a noble . . . brahman . . . merchant . . . w r orker 

1 vessa, which I have translated throughout by “ merchant ” could only 

be a merchant-trader if he first provided himself with something to sell, 
mainly grains and the products of the cow. 

3 Cf. D, i. 93. 3 altabhdvassa abhinibbatti , two very complex words. 



370 


96. Esukarisutta 


II. 181-182 


family, it is reckoned precisely as noble . . . brahman . . . merchant 
. . . worker. But if, brahman, one who has gone forth from home 
into homelessness from a noble family, owing to the dhamma and 
discipline promulgated by the Tathagata refrains from onslaught 
on creatures, from taking what has not been given, from unchastity, 
lying, slanderous speech, harsh speech, gossiping, is not covetous, 
not malevolent in mind and is of right view, he is accomplishing the 
right path, dhamma , what is skilled. 1 [182] And if, brahman, one 
who has gone forth from home into homelessness from a brahman 
family ... a merchant family ... a worker family, owing to this 
dhamma and discipline promulgated by the Tathagata refrains from 
onslaught on creatures . . . and is of right view, he is accomplishing 
the right path, dhamma , what is skilled. What do you think about 
this, brahman ? On this supposition, is it only a brahman who is 
capable of developing a mind of friendliness that is without enmity, 
without malevolence ? And not a noble, not a merchant, not a 
worker ?” 2 

“ That is not so, good Gotama. For on this supposition a noble 
too is capable of developing a mind of friendliness that is without 
enmity, without malevolence, and so is a brahman, good Gotama, 
and so is a merchant, good Gotama, and so is a worker, good Gotama 
— so, good Gotama, on this supposition all the four castes are capable 
of developing a mind of friendliness that is without enmity, without 
malevolence.” 

“ Even so, brahman, if one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a noble family, owing to the dhamma, and dis- 
cipline promulgated by the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on 
creatures ... he is accomplishing the right path, dhamma , what is 
skilled. And if, brahman, one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a brahman family ... a merchant family ... a 
worker family, owing to this dhamma and discipline promulgated by 
the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on creatures ... he is accom- 
plishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled. What do you 
think about this, brahman ? Is it only a brahman who, taking a 
back-ccratcher and bath-powder 3 and going to a river, is capable of 
cleansing himself of dust and mud ? And not a noble, not a merchant, 
not a worker ?” 

“ That is not so, good Gotama. A noble too, good Gotama, 


1 Cf. M. i. 502 (above, p. 182), if. ii. 197 (below, p. 386). 

8 Cf. M. ii. 151 (above, p. 343). 8 Cf. M. ii. 151. 



II. 182-184 


With EsuJcdri 


371 


taking a back-scratcher and bath-powder and going to a river, is 
capable of cleansing himself of dust and mud. And so is a brahman, 
good Gotama, and so is a merchant, [183] good Gotama, and so 
is a worker, good Gotama — so, good Gotama, all the four castes, 
taking a back-scratcher and bath-powder and going to a river, are 
capable of cleansing themselves of dust and mud. ,, 

“ Even so, brahman, if one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a noble family, owing to this dhamma and dis- 
cipline promulgated by the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on 
creatures ... he is accomplishing the right path, dhamma , what is 
skilled. And if, brahman, one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a brahman family ... a merchant family ... a 
worker family, owing to this dhamma and discipline promulgated by 
the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on creatures ... he is accom- 
plishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled. What do you 
think about this, brahman ? If 1 a noble anointed king were to 
assemble a hundred men of varying origins ... (as above , p. 344 to 
p. 345 reading brahman for Assalayana) . . .” [184] “. . . So, good 
Gotama, all these fires have flame and hue and brightness and all are 
able to serve the purposes of a fire.” 

“ Even so, brahman, if one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a noble family, owing to this dhamma and dis- 
cipline promulgated by the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on 
creatures ... he is accomplishing the right path, dhamma , what is 
skilled. And if, brahman, one who has gone forth from home into 
homelessness from a brahman family ... a merchant family ... a 
worker family, owing to this dhamma and discipline promulgated by 
the Tathagata refrains from onslaught on creatures ... he is accom- 
plishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled.” 

When this had been said the brahman Esukar! spoke thus to the 
Lord: 

“ It is excellent, good Gotama, it is excellent, good Gotama . . . 
May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple going for refuge 
from this day forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse with Esukari: 

The Sixth 


1 As at M. ii. 151-152. 



97. DISCOURSE WITH DHANANJANI 

(Dhananjanisutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding-place. Now at that 
time the venerable Sariputta was walking on tour near the Northern 
Mountain 1 together with a large Order of monks. Then a certain 
[186] monk who had spent the rains near Rajagaha approached the 
Northern Mountain and the venerable Sariputta; having approached, 
he exchanged greetings with the venerable Sariputta, and having 
conversed in a friendly and courteous way he sat down at a respectful 
distance. The venerable Sariputta spoke thus to this monk as he 
was sitting down at a respectful distance: “ I hope, your reverence, 
that the Lord is well and strong ?” 

“ The Lord is well and strong, your reverence.” 

“ And I hope, your reverence, that the Order of monks is well and 
strong V 9 

“ The Order of monks is also well and strong, your reverence.” 

“ There is there, your reverence, a brahman named Dhananjani 
near the Taudulapala Gateway. 2 * * * I hope, your reverence, that the 
brahman named Dhananjani is well and strong ?” 

“ Your reverence, the brahman Dhananjani is also well and 
strong.” 

“ I hope, your reverence, that the brahman Dhananjani is being 
diligent ?” 

“ How could the brahman Dhananjani be diligent, your reverence ? 
Under the king’s patronage, your reverence, the brahman Dhanan- 
jani plunders brahman householders; and under the patronage of 
the brahman householders he plunders the king. His wife who had 
faith and whom he had married from a family that has faith has 
died, and he has married another wife who has no faith and who comes 
from a family that has no faith.” 

“ This is indeed bad hearing, your reverence; indeed, your 

1 Dakkhinagiri. MA. iii. 429 says giri is the mountain slope, and that this 

was the name of the northern part of the mountainous country surrounding 

Rajagaha. 

* One of the lesser gateways of Rajagaha, MA. iii. 429. 

372 



II. 185-186 


373 


With Dhananjani 

reverence, it is bad hearing that we hear the brahman Dhananjani is 
negligent. Perhaps sometime, somewhere we might meet the 
brahman Dhananjani, perhaps there might be some conversation/’ 

Then the venerable Sariputta, having stayed near the Northern 
Mountain for as long as he found suitable, set out on tour for 
Rajagaha. Walking on tour he gradually arrived at Rajagaha. 
While he was there the venerable Sariputta stayed near Rajagaha 
in the Bamboo Grove at the squirrels’ feeding-place. Then the 
venerable Sariputta, dressing in the morning, taking his bowl and 
robe, entered Rajagaha for almsfood. [188] Now at that time the 
brahman Dhananjani was having cows milked in a cow-pen outside 
the town. When the venerable Sariputta had walked for alms in 
Rajagaha and was returning from the alms-gathering after the meal, 
he approached the brahman Dhananjani. The brahman Dhanan- 
jani saw the venerable Sariputta coming in the distance; seeing 
him, he approached the venerable Sariputta; having approached, he 
spoke thus to the venerable Sariputta: “ Drink some of this milk, 
good Sariputta, until it is time for a meal.” 

“ No, brahman, I have finished with eating for today. I will 
take my day-sojourn at the root of a tree— you could come there.” 

“ Yes, sir,” the brahman Dhananjani answered the venerable 
Sariputta in assent. Then when the brahman Dhananjani had had 
breakfast, he approached the venerable Sariputta; having ap- 
proached he exchanged greetings with the venerable Sariputta, and 
having conversed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a 
respectful distance. The venerable Sariputta spoke thus to the 
brahman Dhananjani as he was sitting down at a respectful distance : 
“ I hope that you are being diligent, Dhananjani ?” 

“ How could I be diligent, good Sariputta, when there are my 
parents to support, my wife and children to support, my slaves, 
servants and work-people to support, when there are services to 
perform 1 for friends and acquaintances, services to perform for kith 
and kin, services to perform for guests, rites to perform 1 for the 
ancestors, rites to perform for the devatds , duties to perform 1 for the 
king — and this body too must be satisfied and looked after.” 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Suppose someone 
were a non-dAamma-farer, an uneven-farer because of his parents; 
because of his non-dftawma-faring, uneven-faring the guardians of 
Niraya Hell might drag him off to Niraya Hell. Would he gain 


1 karanlyam kdtabbam. 



374 


II. 186-188 


97 . DhdnaHjdnisutta 

anything by saying: 4 I was a non-c?Aamraa-farer, an uneven-farer 
because of my parents — do not let the guardians of Niraya Hell 
(drag) me off to Niraya Hell V [187] Or would his parents gain 
anything for him by saying: 4 It was because of us that he was a 
non-cOiamma-farer, an uneven-farer — do not let the guardians of 
Niraya Hell (drag) him off to Niraya Hell ’? ” 

“ No, good Sariputta, for the guardians of Niraya Hell would 
hurl him wailing into Niraya Hell itself.” 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Suppose some- 
one were a non-dhamma-f&ieT, an uneven farer because of his wife 
and children 1 ... his slaves, servants and work-people ... his friends 
and acquaintances ... his kith and kin ... his guests . . . [188] . . . 
his ancestors . . . the devatds . . . the king ; because of his non -dhamma- 
faring, uneven-faring the guardians of Niraya Hell might drag 
him off to Niraya Hell. Would he gain anything by saying . . . 
\ . . do not let the guardians of Niraya Hell (drag) him off to Niraya 
Heir?” 

44 No, good Sariputta, for the guardians of Niraya Hell would hurl 
him wailing into Niraya Hell itself.” 

44 What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Suppose someone 
were a non-dhamma-i&ieT, an uneven-farer because of satisfying and 
looking after his body; because of his non-rf/tamwa-faring, uneven- 
faring the guardians of Niraya Hell might drag him off to Niraya 
Hell. Would he gain anything by saying: 4 1 was a no n-ddiamma- 
farer, an uneven-farer because of satisfying and looking after my 
body — do not let the guardians of Niraya Hell (drag) me off to 
Niraya Hell’ ? Or would others gain anything for him by saying: 

4 He was a non-efAomma-farer, an uneven-farer because of satisfying 
and looking after his body — do not let the guardians of Niraya Hell 
(drag) him off to Niraya Hell ’? ” 

44 No, good Sariputta, for the guardians of Niraya Hell would hurl 
him wailing into Niraya Hell itself.” 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is the 
better: he who, because of his parents, is a non-(?Aamma-farer, an 
uneven-farer; or he who, because of his parents, is a dAamma-farer, 
an even-farer ?” 

44 He is not the better, Sariputta, who because of his parents is a 
non-(?Aamma-farer, an uneven-farer; but he who, good Sariputta, 
because of his parents is a dhamma-f&iei, an even-farer, he is indeed 


1 As above paragraph mutatis mutandis. 




II. 188-192 With Dhananjani 375 

the better. Dkamrna- faring, even-faring, good Sariputta, is better 
than non-dhamma-f&rmg, uneven-faring.’ * 

“ There are, Dhananjani, other causally effective rightful actions 1 
by which one is able to support one’s parents and not make evil 
kamma but proceed on a course that is good. 8 What do you think 
about this, Dhananjani ? Which is the better: he who, because of 
his wife and children is a non-d%amma-farer, an uneven-farer; or he 
who, because of his wife and children is a dhamma- farer, an even- 
farer ?” 

[189] . . . (Question and answer repeated for slaves, servants and 
workpeople; friends and acquaintances; kith and kin; [190] guests; 
ancestors; devatas ; . . . [191] . . . king; , . . satisfaction and care of the 
body . . .) 

“ He who, good Sariputta, because of satisfying and caring for his 
body, is a non- dhamma- farer, an uneven-farer — he is not the better; 
but he who, good Sariputta, because of satisfying and caring for his 
body is a dhamma- farer, an even-farer, he is indeed the better. 
Dhamma- faring, even-faring, good Sariputta, is better than non- 
dhamma- faring, uneven-faring.” 

“ There are, Dhananjani, other causally effective rightful actions 
by which one is able to satisfy and care for the body and not make 
evil kamma but proceed on a course that is good.” 

Then Dhananjani the brahman, having rejoiced in what the 
venerable Sariputta had said, having given thanks, rising from his 
seat departed. 

Then after a time the brahman Dhananjani was ill, in pain, 
grievously afflicted. Then the brahman Dhananjani summoned a 
man, and said : " Come you, my good man, [192] approach the Lord ; 
having approached, in my name salute the Lord’s feet with your 
head, saying: * Revered sir, Dhananjani the brahman is ill, in pain, 
grievously afflicted; he salutes the Lord’s feet with his head’; and 
then approach the venerable Sariputta; having approached, in my 
name salute the venerable Sariputta’s feet with your head, saying: 
• Revered, sir, Dhananjani the brahman is ill, ill pain, grieV0U8ly 
afflicted; he salutes the venerable Sariputta’s feet with his head’; 
and then say: 4 It would be good indeed, revered sir, if the venerable 
Sariputta would approach the dwelling of the brahman Dhananjani, 
out of compassion.’ ” 

“ Yes, revered sir,” and this man, having answered the brahman 

1 sahetuka dhammika kammantd. 

2 punnath papipadath . Here, as frequently, punna as the opposite of papa, 
evil, is “ good ” rather than “ merit.” 



376 


II. 192-193 


97. Dhanarijanisutta 

Dhananjani in assent, approached the Lord; having approached, 
having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he 
was sitting down at a respectful distance, this man spoke thus to the 
Lord: “ Revered sir, Dhananjani the brahman is ill ... he salutes the 
Lord's feet with his head." And then he approached the venerable 
Sariputta; having approached, having greeted the venerable 
Sariputta, he sat down at a respectful distance. As he was sitting 
down at a respectful distance, this man spoke thus to the venerable 
Sariputta: 44 Revered sir, the brahman Dhananjani is ill ... It would 
be good indeed, revered sir, if the venerable Sariputta would 
approach the dwelling of the brahman Dhananjani, out of compas- 
sion." 

Then the venerable Sariputta, having dressed in the morning, 
taking his bowl and robe, approached the dwelling of the brahman 
Dhananjani; having approached, he sat down on the appointed seat. 
As he was sitting down the venerable Sariputta spoke thus to the 
brahman Dhananjani: 44 1 hope that you, Dhananjani, are better, 
I hope you are keeping going. I hope the painful feelings are 
decreasing, not increasing, and that a decrease in them is apparent, 
not an increase V* 

44 No, good Sariputta, I am no better, I am not keeping going. 
My grievously painful feelings are increasing, not decreasing, an 
increase in them is apparent, not a decrease. Good Sariputta, as 1 
[193] a strong man might cleave one's head with a sharp-edged 
sword, even so, good Sariputta, do exceedingly loud winds rend my 
head. I am no better, good Sariputta, I am not keeping going. 
My grievously painful feelings are increasing, not decreasing, an 
increase in them is apparent, not a decrease. As, good Sariputta, 
a strong man might clamp a turban on one’s head with a tight leather 
strap, even so, good Sariputta, do I have very bad headaches. I 
am no better ... an increase in them is apparent, not a decrease. 
As, good Sariputta, a skilled cattle butcher or his apprentice might 
cut through the stomach with a sharp butcher's knife, even so, good 
Sariputta, do very strong winds cut through my stomach. I am 
no better ... an increase in them is apparent, not a decrease. As, 
good Sariputta, two strong men, having taken hold of a weaker man 
by his limbs, might set fire to him, might make him sizzle up over a 
charcoal pit, even so, good Sariputta, there is a fierce heat in my 
body. I am no better, good Sariputta, I am not keeping going. 


1 This and the following similes as at M. i. 243-244, etc. 



II. 193-194 


With Dhdnahjdni 377 

My grievously painful feelings are increasing, not decreasing, an 
increase in them is apparent, not a decrease/’ 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is better; 
Niraya Hell or an animal womb ?” 

“An animal womb is better than Niraya Hell, good Sari- 
putta.” 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is better: 
an animal womb or the realm of the departed V 9 
“ The realm of the departed is better . . 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is better: 
the realm of the departed or human-kind 1 
“ Human-kind is better . . /* 

[194] “ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is 
better: human-kind or the Four Great Regent devas 1 V 9 
“ The Four Great Regent devas . . /’ 

. . Which are better: the Four Great Regent devas or the devas 
of the Thirty-Three V 9 
“ The devas of the Thirty-Three , . 

. . Which are better: the devas of the Thirty-Three or Yama’s 
devas V 9 

“ Yama’s devas . . 

. . Which are better: Yama’s devas or the Tusita devas V 9 
“ The Tusita devas . . 

. . Which are better: the Tusita devas or the devas of creation V 9 
u The devas of creation . • 

. . Which are better: the devas of creation or the devas that have 
power over the creations of other V 9 

“ The devas that have power over the creations of others are better 
than the devas of creation, good Sariputta.” 

“ What do you think about this, Dhananjani ? Which is better: 
the devas that have power over the creations of others or the Erahma- 
world V 9 

“ The revered Sariputta said * Brahma-world/ the revered 
Sariputta said 1 Brahma-world, y ” 

Then it occurred to the venerable Sariputta: “ These brahmans 
are very intent on the Brahma-world. Suppose I were to show the 
brahman Dhananjani the way to companionship with Brahma ? — 
Dhananjani, I will show you the way to companionship with Brahma. 
Listen to it, attend carefully, and I will speak/’ 


1 Cf. with the longer list of devas at M. i. 289. 



378 97. Dhanafijanisutta II. 194-195 

“ Yes, sir,” the brahman Dhananjani answered the venerable 
Sariputta in assent. [195] The venerable Sariputta spoke thus: 

“ And which, Dhananjani, is the way to companionship with 
Brahma ? As to this, Dhananjani, a monk dwells, having suffused 
the first quarter with a mind of friendliness, likewise the second, 
likewise the third, likewise the fourth; just so above, below, across; 
he dwells having suffused the whole world everywhere, in every way, 
with a mind of friendliness that is far-reaching, wide-spread, 
immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence. This, Dha- 
nanjani, is a way to companionship with Brahma. And again, 
Dhananjani, the monk dwells, having suffused the first quarter with 
a mind of compassion , . . sympathetic joy . . . equanimity . . . that 
is far-reaching, wide-spread, immeasurable, without enmity, with- 
out malevolence. This, Dhananjani, is a way to companionship 
with Brahma.” 

“ Well then, good Sariputta, in my name salute the Lord’s feet 
with your head, and say: ‘ Lord, the brahman Dhananjani is ill, in 
pain, grievously afflicted; he salutes the Lord’s feet with his head.’ ” 

Then, although there was something further to be done, the 
venerable Sariputta established the brahman Dhananjani (only) in 
the less, in a Brahma-world 1 and, rising from his seat, he departed. 
Soon after the venerable Sariputta had gone, the brahman Dhanan- 
jani passed away, and arose in the Brahma-world. 2 

Then the Lord addressed the monks, saying: “ Monks, although 
there was something further to be done, this Sariputta established 
the brahman Dhananjani (only) in the less, in the Brahma-world, 
and rising from his seat, he is departing.” 

Then the venerable Sariputta approached the Lord; having 
approached, having greeted the Lord, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
venerable Sariputta spoke thus to the Lord: “ Lord, the brahman 
Dhananjani is ill, in pain, grievously afflicted; he salutes the Lord’s 
feet with his head.” 


1 The idea no doubt is that Sariputta missed an opportunity of telling the 
brahman about dhamma and spoke only of hina Brahmaloka , a “ low ” world 
instead of the lobuUara dhamma , the supermundane dhamma (see Sta. No. 96, 
above, p. 369), towards the winning of which the teaching of the Buddha is 
directed. 

* No mention of hina , low or lesser, Brahma-world here. This raises the 
problem of whether Dhananjani profited more from Sariputta’s teaching than 
the latter knew or had attempted. 



379 


II. 195-196 Sn. 115 With Dhananjani 

“ But why did you, Sariputta, although [196] there was something 
further to be done, having established the brahman Dhananjani 
(only) in the less, in the Brahma- world, rising from your seat, 
depart V n 

“ It occurred to me, Lord : ‘ These brahmans are very intent on the 
Brahma-world. Suppose I were to show the brahman Dhananjani 
the way to companionship with Brahma V ” 

“ Sariputta, the brahman Dhananjani has died and has uprisen in 
the Brahma-world.” 


Discourse with Dhananjani: 
The Seventh 


98. DISCOURSE TO VASETTHA 

(Vasetthasutta) 1 2 

[£tt.ll5] Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was staying near 
Icchanankala in a forest glade near Icchanankala. Now at that time 
many wealthy and distinguished brahmans were living in Icchanan- 
kala, such as the brahman Canki, 3 the brahman Tarukkha, the 
brahman Pokkharasati, the brahman Janussoni, the brahman Tod- 
eyya, and other wealthy and distinguished brahmans. 4 Then as the 
brahman youths Vasettha and Bharadvaja were pacing up and down 
and roaming about on foot, this chance conversation arose : “ How is 
one a brahman ?” The brahman youth Bharadvaja spoke thus: 
“ If one is of pure birth on both the mother’s and the father’s side, 

1 A rebuke recorded to have been given by Gotama to Sariputta, “ the 
beloved disciple,” is of rare occurrence. See above, p. 131 and Intr. p. xxvi. 

2 The text of this Discourse is not given in M. ii. It is the same as the 
V dsetthasutia at Sn. p. 115 ff. The Comys (SnA. 462 ff. and MA. iii. 431 ff.) 
show several interesting variations. Cf. also D. i. 235 ff. 

8 MA. iii. 431 says that Canki and the four others were priests of King 
Pasenadi. 

4 MA. iii. 431: ‘‘every six months they gather together in two places: 
if they want to purify (their) birth (jdtim sodhetukama), then for this purpose 
they gather together at Ukkattha under Pokkharasati. If they want to 
purify the mantras , .then they gather together at Icchanankala. At this time 
they gathered together there for purifying the mantras .” SnA. 462 says that 
they were there for meditating upon and thoroughly examining the Vedas. 



380 


Sn . 115-116 


98. Vasetthasutta 

and is of pure descent back through seven generations, unchallenged 
and irreproachable in respect of birth, then is one a brahman.’’ The 
brahman youth Vasettha spoke thus: “ If one is of moral habit and 
right practice, 1 then is one a brahman.” But neither was Bharad- 
vaja the brahman youth 116 ] able to convince Vaseftha the 
brahman youth, nor was Vaseftha the brahman youth able to 
convince Bharadvaja the brahman youth. Then Vasettha the 
brahman youth spoke thus to Bharadvaja the brahman youth: 
“ Bharadvaja, this recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans, gone 
forth from a Sakyan clan, is staying near Icchanankala in a forest 
glade near Icchanankala. And a lovely report has gone abroad about 
the recluse Gotama thus: £ . . . the Awakened One, the Lord.’ Let 
us go, good Bharadvaja; we will approach the recluse Gotama, and 
having approached we will ask the recluse Gotama about this 
matter, and as the recluse Gotama explains it to us, so will we accept 
it.” 

“ Yes, sir,” the brahman youth Bharadvaja answered the brah- 
man youth Vase^ha in assent. Then the brahman youths Vasettha 
and Bharadvaja approached the Lord; having approached, they 
exchanged greetings with the Lord; having conversed in a friendly 
and courteous way, they sat down at a respectful distance. As he 
was sitting down at a respectful distance, Vasettha the brahman 
youth addressed the Lord in these verses : 

Vasettha “ Both of us have been recognised as 2 and we claim to be 
thxee-Veda-(men), 

I, of Pokkharasati (a pupil), this brahman youth of 
Tarukkha. (594) 3 

In what is pointed out of the three Vedas — in that we are 
whole : 

We are versed in the pada-pdtka* grammarians, in 
speaking we are like teachers. (595) 

1 MA . iii. 432=£nA. 463, in explanation of kammana (Sn. 696) say: 
“ to say one 1 is of moral habit * (sHlava) refers to the sevenfold ways of skilled 
kamma in gesture and speech; referring to the threefold Icamma of mind, one 
says 4 endowed with right practice * (vat(t)a~sampanna)” . See M. Sta. 41 
for this tenfold way of skilled action. 

* By their teachers. 

8 These numbers refer to Sn. verse numbers. For passages parallel to 
these verses see the Concordance in Wav. Cads., p. 199/. 

4 An educated brahman who can pronounce each word in a mantra separately 
“ without coalescence or sarhdhi and with its own specific accent ** is a padalca , 




Sn . 117-118 To Vdsettha 381 

[&n. 117] There is contention between us, Gotama, in respect of 
birth: 

4 By birth one is a brahman ’ — so speaks Bharadvaja; 
But I say, 4 By doing n — let the Visioned One know it thus. 
(596) 

As we are each unable to convince the other, 

We come to ask the revered Self-Awakened One, widely 
famed. (597) 

As people salute the moon when it has come to the full, 
So, in the world, honouring him, do they thus praise 
Gotama. (598) 

We are asking Gotama, the Eye risen in the world: 

Is one by birth a brahman or does one (so) become by 
doing ? 

Tell us this who know not, that a brahman we may know.” 
(599) 

Gotama 2 44 Vaseftha,” said the Lord, 44 1 will expound 
To you in gradual and very truth 
Division in the kinds 3 of living things; (600) 

For kinds divide. 4 Behold the grass and trees ! 

They reason not, yet they possess the mark 
After their kind, for kinds indeed divide. (601) 

[/Sn. 118] Consider then the beetles, moths and ants: 

They after their kind too possess the mark . . . (602) 
And so four-footed creatures, great and small . . . (603) 

The reptiles, snakes, the long-backed animals . . . (604) 

1 kammana , see above, p. 380, n. 1. It therefore appears to mean by 
accomplished training, that is in alia and mind development; and thus has 
no pronounced reference to past kamma working in the present. PED. 
gives “ by character.” In the following verses, e.g. 650 jf., I follow E. M. Hare 
in translating as “ deeds.” Cf. Sn. 136: kammana vasab hoti kammana hoti 
brahmano , which SnA. 183 explains as: “ he is an outcast© from thriving on 
impure kamma , a brahman from driving out what is impure by means of pure 
kamma ” (or, “ doing,” kammund , where kammund is but a variant of thfl 
instrumental kammana ). 

8 From here to the end of the verses I give E. M. Hare's translation in 
Woven Cadences. 

8 jdti , kind or birth. 

4 There is a diversity of kind. 


i.e. versed in Vedic lines and words. See E. N. Bandekar, Cultural Back 
ground of the Vedas t VCR. vol. XI, Nos. 3 and 4, July-October, 1953, p. 139. 





382 


Sn. 1 18-120 


98. V asetthasutta 

Fish and pond-feeders, water-denizens . . . (605) 

Birds and the winged creatures, fowls o’ the air, 

They after their kind all possess the mark; (606) 

For kinds divide. Each after his kind bears 
His mark; in man there is not manifold. 1 (607) 

Not in the hair or head or ears or eyes, 

Not in the mouth or nose or lips or brows, (608) 

Not in the throat, hips, belly or the back, 

Not in the rump, sex-organs or the breast, (609) 

Not in the hands or feet, fingers or nails, 

Not in the legs or thighs, colour or voice, 

Is mark that forms his kind as in all else. (610) 

[Sn. 119] Nothing unique 2 is in men’s bodies found: 

The difference in men is nominal. (611) 

The man forsooth who earns his livelihood 
By minding cows and fields, know, Vase^tha, 

He is a farmer, not a brahmana ! (612) 

Who works at diverse crafts, know him to be 
An artisan and not a brahmana ! (613) 

Who plies a trade for livelihood, know him 
To be a trader, not a brahmana ! (614) 

Who toils in service for another man, 

Know as a servant, not a brahmana ! (615) 

Who lives by taking things not giv’n, know him 
To be a thief and not a brahmana ! (616) 

Who lives indeed by archery, know* him 
To be a soldier, not a brahmana ! (617) 

Who lives by priestly craft, know him to be 
A celebrant and not a brahmana ! (618) 

And he who owns the village, countryside, 

Know him as a rajah and no brahmana ! (619) 

I call none * brahman * from mere parentage, 

Tho’ he be ‘ Sir J -ed and wealthy too: the man 
Of naught, who grasps not, brahman him I call ! (620) 

Who cuts all fetters, thirsting not, fears not, 

Fetter-free, bondless, brahman him I call. (621) 

[$r&. 120] Who cuts thong, halter, strap, ana cord, throws off 


1 J.e. no variety of native marks. 


1 Or specific. 




Sn. 120-121 To Vasettha 383 

The bar, 1 has woken, brahman him I call. (622) 

Who, blameless, bears blows, bonds, abuse, well armed 
With strength of patience, brahman him I call. (623) 

Him wrathless, spotless, moral, free of pride, 2 
Last body bearing, tamed, I brahman call. (624) 

As water on a leaf, as seed on awl, 

Who to lust clings not, brahman him I call. (625) 

Who knows here now that ill for self is quenched, 
Burden-dropped, 3 bondless, brahman him I call. (626) 

Him of deep wisdom, sage, skilled in all ways, 

Won to the goal supreme, I brahman call. (627) 

Who not with homeless nor with householder sorts, 
Frugal, resort-less, brahman him I call. (628) 

Who rod lays by ’gainst weak and strong, slays not. 

To slay incites none, brahman him I call. (629) 

Him cool 4 mid violence, mid foes no foe, 

Mid grasping grasping not, I brahman call. (630) 

From whom hate, passion, pride, and guile have fall’n, 

As seed from needle, brahman him I call. (631) 

[Sn. 121] Who teaches gently, utters words of truth, 

And none offendeth, brahman him I call. (632) 

Who here takes naught, long, short, small, large, good, 
bad, 

Nothing not given, brahman him I call. (633) 

In whom no hopes are found for here or yon, 

Fetter-free, hope-free, brahman him I call. (634) 

In whom no grooves are found, gone doubt, who knows, 
Won' to depths deathless, 6 brahman him I call. (635) 

Who here has passed bond of both good and ill, 

Griefless, cleansed, dustless, brahman him I call. (636) 

1 Or, lifts the barrier, ukkhittapaligha , as at M. i. 139. # anussadam. 

* pannabhara, as at M . i. 139. 4 nibbuta . 

4 amatogadha , the plunge into deathlessness. 




384 98. Vdsetthasuita Sn. 121-122 

Him spotless, cleansed, unclouded, clear as moon, 

With ‘ life n and pleasure quenched, I brahman call. (637 ) 

Who hath this bog, false, painful round, passed o’er, 
Crossed and yon-fared, a muser, doubt gone, still, 

Cool 2 in detachment, brahman him I call. (638) 

Who pleasures here forsakes and homeless fares, 

Lust and 1 life >l ended, brahman him I call. (639) 

Who craving here forsakes and homeless fares, 

Craving, * life n ended, brahman him I call. (640) 

Him rid of human yoke, passed deva- yoke, 

Fetterless, free of yokes, I brahman call. (641) 

Him rid of likes and dislikes, cool, 3 detached, 

Vigorous, world-conqueror, I brahman call. (642) 

[Sn. 122] Who knows of all men the rise and fall, uncaught, 
Awake, well-faring, brahman him I call. (643) 

Whose lot men, devas, gandharvas know not, 

Cankerless, worthy, 4 brahman him I call. (644) 

Him for whom present, future, past, holds naught, 

Who grasps not, man-of-naught, I brahman call. (645) 

The bull, elect, the hero, victor, sage, 

Awake, still, washen,; brahman him I call. (646) 

Who knows his former life, sees heav’n and hell, 

Won to birth’s ending, brahman him I call. (647) 

What the world holds as * name * and * lineage ’ 

Is indeed nominal, terms risen here 
And there by popular opinion, (648) 

Adhered to long, views of the ignorant ! 

The ignorant declare : ‘ A brahman is (649) 

By birth.’ None is by birth a brahman; none 
By birth no brahmana; by deeds is one 
A brahmana, by deeds no brahmana ! (650) 


1 bhava . 1 nibbuta. * sitibhuta, cooled, become cool. 4 arahaniam . 



Sn. 122-123 


385 


To Vasettha 

By deeds one is a farmer and by deeds 
An artisan, by deeds a trader too; (651) 

By deeds one is a servant and a thief, 

By deeds a soldier and a celebrant, 

And even so a rajah is by deeds, (652) 

[Sn. 123 ] ’ Tis thus in truth the wise perceive the deed, 

Seers of origin by way of cause, 1 
Men expert in result of deeds. The world (653) 

Revolves by deeds, mankind revolves by deeds; 

As pin holds fast the rolling chariot's wheel, 

So beings are in bondage held by deeds. (654) 

A brahman one becomes by Brahma-faring, 

By temperance, austerity, restraint: 

This is indeed supreme for brahmanhood. (655) 

Who by three Vedas is accomplished, 

With no more coming here, and man-of-ealm, 

Know thou, Vasettha, even thus of him: 

He is of knowers Sakka 2 and Brahma !” (656) 

When this had been said, the brahman youths Vasettha and 
Bharadvaja spoke thus to the Lord: “ It is wonderful, good Gotama 
... we are going to the revered Gotama for refuge 3 4 and to dhamma and 
to the Order of monks. May the revered Gotama accept us as lay- 
disciples going for refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Vasettha : 

The Eighth 


1 pa^iccasamuppadadasa . 

* Note at Wov. Cads . p. 97 reads: “ Sn. Index suggests word-play; so perhaps 

* best possible of knowers.* Tlhi vijjahi may refer to the * triple lore * given 
in verse 647 above, see K.S. i. 208 and Q.S. i. 149.*’ 

4 According to DA. 406 this was their first time of going for refuge. The 
second was after they had heard the Tevijja Sutianta (D. Sta. 13); a few 
days afterwards they “ went forth ”, were ozdained and attained arahantskip. 
DA. 406 refers to the Agganna Suita (D. Sta. 27) for this event, which DA. 872 
states to be the case. 



99. DISCOURSE WITH SUBHA 

(Subhasutta) 

Thus have I heard: At one time the Lord was staying near SavatthI 
in the Jeta Grove in Anathapmdika’s monastery. Now at that time 
the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son 1 * was residing in SavatthI 
in a householder’s dwelling on some business or other. Then the 
brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, who was staying in that 
householder’s dwelling, spoke thus to that householder: “ I have 
heard, householder, that SavatthI is not unfrequented by perfected 
ones. Could we today pay our respects to a recluse or brahman 1” a 

“ Revered sir, this Lord is staying near SavatthI in the Jeta Grove 
in Anathapingiika’s monastery. You could pay respects to this 
Lord, revered sir.” 

[197] When the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, had 
answered that householder in assent, he approached the Lord ; having 
approached, he exchanged greetings with the Lord; having con- 
versed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a respectful 
distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, the 
brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, spoke thus to the Lord: 

“ Good Gotama, brahmans speak thus: ‘ A householder is accom- 
plishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled; 3 one who has gone 
forth is not accomplishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled.* 
What does the good Gotama say to this ?” 

“ On this point I, brahman youth, discriminate, 4 * on this point I 
do not speak definitely. 6 I, brahman youth, do not praise a wrong 
course in either a householder or one who has gone forth. If, 
brahman .youth, either a householder 8 or one who has gone forth is 
faring along wrongly, then as a result and consequence of his wrong 


1 The Svhhasulta at D, I. 204 jgf. records a conversation between Subha 

and Ananda soon after the Buddha’s death. See also M. Sta. 135, the real 
name for which, according to Bu., is also Subhasutta. See DA . 384 /, Todeyya 
was a rich brahman, overlord of a village named Tudi not far from SavatthI. 

* Cf , D. i. 47. 8 Cf. M . i. 502 (above, p. 182). 

4 vibhajjavado , speak analysing. 

6 na ekamsavado , do not make a definite assertion, do not speak one-sidedly. 

4 Cf, A . i. 69. 


386 



II. 197-198 


With Svbha 


387 


course he is not accomplishing the right path, dhantma , what is 
skilled. But I, brahman youth, praise a right course both for a 
householder and for one who has gone forth. If, brahman youth, 
either a householder or one who has gone forth is faring along rightly, 
then as a result and consequence of his right course he is accom- 
plishing the right path, dhamma , what is skilled.” 

“ Good Gotama, brahmans speak thus : ‘ Having a great deal to do : 
many duties, a large administration, great problems — this occupa- 
tion 1 of householders is of great fruit. Not having a great deal to do : 2 
few duties, 3 a small administration, small problems — this occupation 
of those who have gone forth is of small fruit.’ What does the good 
Gotama say to this ?” 

“ On this point too I, brahman youth, discriminate, on this point 
I do not speak definitely. There is, brahman youth, an occupation 
where there is a great deal to do : many duties, a large administration, 
great problems — which if failed of is of small fruit. There is, 
brahman youth, an occupation where there is a great deal to do: 
many duties, a large administration, great problems — which if 
succeeded in is of great fruit. There is, brahman youth, an occupation 
where there is not a great deal to do: few duties, a small adminis- 
tration, small problems — which if failed of is of small fruit. There 
is, brahman youth, an occupation where there is not a great deal 
to do: few duties, a small administration, small problems — which if 
succeeded in is of great fruit. And what, [198] brahman youth, is 
an occupation where there is a great deal to do: many duties, a large 
administration, great problems — which if failed of is of small fruit ? 
Agriculture, brahman youth, is an occupation where there is a great 
deal to do : many duties, a large administration, great problems — • 
which if failed of is of small fruit. And what, brahman youth, is an 
occupation where there is a great deal to do : many duties . . . which 
if succeeded in is of great fruit ? Agriculture, brahman youth, is an 
occupation . . . which if succeeded in is of great fruit. 

And what, brahman youth, is an occupation where there is not a 
great deal to do : few duties, a small administration, small problems— 
which if failed of is of small fruit ? Trading, brahman youth, is an 
occupation where there is not a great deal to do : few duties, a small 
administration, small problems — which if failed of is of small fruit. 
And what, brahman youth, is an occupation where there is not a 


1 kammatthdna . * appattha; cf. A. iii. 120. 

8 appakiccha ; cf. A . iii. 120; It. p. 72; Sn. 144. 



388 


99. Subhasutta 


II. 198-199 


great deal to do: few duties . . . which if succeeded in is of great 
fruit ? Trading, brahman youth is an occupation where there is not 
a great deal to do . . . which if succeeded in is of great fruit. As, 
brahman youth, agriculture is an occupation where there is a great 
deal to do : many duties, a large administration, great problems — 
which if failed of is of small fruit, even so, brahman youth, an 
occupation of a householder where there is a great deal to do : many 
duties ... is one which if failed of is of small fruit. As, brahman 
youth, agriculture is an occupation where there is a great deal to do 
. . . which if succeeded in is of great fruit, even so, brahman youth, 
an occupation of a householder where there is a great deal to do: 
many duties, a large administration, great problems — is one which 
if succeeded in is of great fruit. As, brahman youth, trading is an 
occupation where there is not a great deal to do : few duties, a small 
administration, small problems, which if failed of is of small fruit, 
even so, brahman youth, an occupation of one who has gone forth 
where there is not a great deal to do : few duties, a small administra- 
tion, small problems — is one which if failed of is of small fruit. As, 
brahman youth, trading is an occupation where there is not a great 
deal to do: few duties, a small administration, small problems — 
which if succeeded in is of great fruit, even so, [ 199 ] brahman youth, 
an occupation of one who has gone forth where there is not a great 
deal to do: few duties, a small administration, small problems — 
is one which if succeeded in is of great fruit.” 

“ Brahmans, good Gotama, lay down five things 1 for the doing 2 
of good, for success in what is skilled.” 

“ If it were not burdensome to you, brahman youth, it would be 
good if you would speak in this company about those five things that 
the brahmans lay down for the doing of good, for success in what is 
skilled.” 

“ It is not burdensome to me, good Gotama, where there may be 
a revered one or ones like revered ones.” 

“ Well then, brahman youth, do speak.” 

“ Truth, good Gotama, is the first thing that brahmans lay down 
for the doing of good, for success in what is skilled. Austerity, good 
Gotama, is the second thing . . . Chastity, 3 good Gotama, is the third 


1 panca dhamme . 

* kiriyaya , or causally effecting, hence Gotama’s question, just below, 
whether any result ( vipaka , ripening) is declared. 

3 brahmacariya . MA. iii. 448 gives chastity. Cf. MA , iii. 443, VbhA. 
504, SnA. 317, 387. 



II. 199-200 


With Subha 


389 


thing . . . Study of the (Vedic) hymns, 1 good Gotama, is the fourth 
thing . . . Renunciation, good Gotama, is the fifth thing that brahmans 
lay down for the doing of good, for success in what is skilled. 
Brahmans, good Gotama, lay down these five things for the doing of 
good, for success in what is skilled. What does the good Gotama say 
to this ?” 

“ But what, brahman youth ? Is there even a single brahman 
who speaks thus: ‘ I, having realised by 2 super-knowledge, declare 
the result of these five things 5 V* 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

“ So what, brahman youth ? Is there a single teacher of brah- 
mans, even a single line of teachers back through seven generations 
of teachers, who speaks thus: ‘ I, having realised by my own super- 
knowledge, declare the result of these five things ’ ?” 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

[ 800 ] “ So what, brahman youth ? Even those who were formerly 
seers of the brahmans, 3 makers of mantras , preservers of mantras , 
whose ancient mantras as sung, taught and composed the brahmans 
of today still sing, still speak; they still speak what was spoken, they 
still teach what was taught— that is to say (by) Atthaka, Vamaka, 
Vamadeva, Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bharadvaja, Vaset- 
tha, Kassapa, Bhagu — do even these speak thus: ‘We, having 
realised by our own super-knowledge, declare the result of these 
five things * ?” 

“ No, good Gotama.” 

“ So what you are really saying, brahman youth, is that among 
the brahmans there is not even a single brahman who speaks thus 
. . . not even a single teacher of brahmans, not even a single line of 
teachers back through seven generations of teachers who speaks 
thus: ‘ I, having realised by my own super-knowledge, declare the 
result of these five things/ And also that even those who were 
formerly seers of the brahmans . . . not even these speak thus: ‘ We, 
having realised by our own super-knowledge, declare the result of 
these five things/ Brahman youth, it is like a string of blind men 4 
holding on to one another — neither does the foremost one see, nor 
does the middle one see, nor does the hindmost one see. Even so, 
methinks, brahman youth, do the words of the brahmans turn out to 


1 ajjhena; MA, iii. 448 says mantagahana , perhaps “ reciting.” 

2 sayam omitted here, probably in error. 

8 As at M . ii. 169. 

4 As at M. ii. 170. 



99. Subhasutta 


390 


II. 200-202 


resemble the string of blind men: neither does the first one see nor 
does the middle one see nor does the last one see.” 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s 
son, angry and displeased at being spoken to by the Lord with the 
simile of the string of blind men, scorning even the Lord, despising 
even the Lord, and saying even of the Lord: “ The recluse Gotama 
will be disgraced,” 1 spoke thus to the Lord: “A brahman, good 
Gotama, Pokkharasati, of the Upamanna (clan, incumbent) 2 of the 
Subhaga forest glade, 3 speaks thus: ‘ Even thus do some recluses and 
brahmans claim states of further-men, the excellent knowledge and 
vision befitting the ariyans. This speech of theirs [201] proves 
merely ridiculous, it proves merely worthless, it proves merely 
empty, it proves merely void. For how could a man know or see 
or realise states of further-men, the excellent knowledge and vision 
befitting the ariyans V — such a situation does not exist.” 

“ But, brahman youth, does the brahman Pokkharasati of the 
Upamanna (clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga forest glade, com- 
prehend with his mind the reasoning in the mind of absolutely all 
recluses and brahmans ?” 

“ Good Gotama, the brahman Pokkharasati of the Upamanna 
(clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga forest glade, does not even 
comprehend with his mind the reasoning in the mind of Punnika, 
his slave woman. So how could he comprehend with his mind the 
reasoning in the mind of absolutely all recluses and brahmans ?” 

“ Brahman youth, it is like 4 a man blind from birth who could not 
see dark or bright shapes, who could not see green . . . yellow . . . red 
. . . crimson shapes, who could not see what is even or uneven, who 
could not see the stars, who could not see the moons and the suns. 
He might speak thus: ‘ There are no dark and bright shapes, there is 
no one who sees dark and bright shapes . . . there are no moons and 
suns, there is no one who sees the moons and the suns. I do not see 
this, therefore it does not exist.’ Would he, brahman youth, in 
speaking rightly speak thus ?” 

“ No, good Gotama. ‘ There are dark and bright shapes, there is 
one who sees dark and bright shapes; there are green shapes, there is 
one who sees green shapes . . . there are moons and suns, there is one 
who sees the moons and the suns. I do not [202] know this, I do not 


1 Cf. M. ii. 43. 1 MA. iii. 447, issara , lord, master. 

8 Near Ukkattha, MA. iii. 447. Pokkharasati was a resident of this place, 

DA. 399. 

* Cf. M. i. 509. 



With Subha 


U. 202 


391 


see this, therefore it does not exist * — in speaking rightly he would 
not speak thus, good Gotama.” 

44 In the same way, brahman youth, the brahman Pokkharasati of 
the Upamanna (clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga forest glade, is 
blind, he is without vision. This situation certainly does not exist— 
that he might know or see or realise states of further-men, the 
excellent knowledge and vision befitting the ariyans. What do you 
think about this, brahman youth? Which is better for those 
wealthy brahmans of Kosala, such as the brahman Canki , 1 the 
brahman Tarukkha, the brahman Pokkharasati, the brahman 
Jaiiussoui, and your father the brahman Todeyya — that the speech 
they should utter be conventional 2 or unconventional ?” 

“ Conventional, good Gotama.” 

44 Which is better for them, that the speech they should utter be 
thought out 3 or not thought out ?” 

44 Thought put, good Gotama.” 

44 Which is better for them, that the speech they should utter be 
considered 4 or not considered ?” 

44 Considered, good Gotama.” 

44 Which is better for them, that the speech they should utter be 
connected with the goal 5 or not connected with the goal V 9 

44 Connected with the goal, good Gotama. ,, 

44 What do you think about this, brahman youth ? This being so, 
is the speech uttered by the brahman Pokkharasati of the Upamanna 
(clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga forest glade, conventional or 
unconventional V 9 

44 Unconventional, good Gotama.” 

44 Is the speech uttered thought out, or not thought out ?” 

44 Not thought out, good Gotama V 9 

44 Is the speech uttered considered or not considered V 9 

44 Not considered, good Gotama.” 

44 Is the speech uttered connected with the goal or not con- 
nected with the goal ?” 

“ Not connected with the goal, good Gotama.” 


1 These five brahmans are also mentioned at the beginning of Sta. 98. 

* mmmusd=8amucca^ as what is agreed upon by the opinion of the world; 
by common consent. 

* manta ; at MA. iii, 447 explained by tvlayitvd , weighed, and by parigan - 
hitvd, examined. 

4 patisankhaya —jdnilva, MA . iii. 447. 

4 althasamhita — kdrananissita, dependent on action (?). 



392 


99. Subhasutta 


II. 203-204 


[203] “ These five, brahman youth, are hindrances. What five ? 
The hindrance of desire for sense-pleasures, the hindrance of 
malevolence, the hindrance of sloth and torpor, the hindrance of 
restlessness and worry, the liindrance of doubt. These, brahman 
youth, are the five hindrances. Brahman youth, the brahman 
Pokkharasati, of the Upamaiina (clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga 
forest glade, is veiled, obstructed, covered and enveloped by these 
five hindrances. This situation certainly does not occur that he 
should know or see or realise states of further-men, the excellent 
knowledge and vision befitting the ariyans. These five, brahman 
youth, are the strands of pleasures of the senses : What five ? 
Material shapes cognisable by the eye, agreeable, pleasant, liked, 
enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, alluring. Sounds 
cognisable by the ear . . . Smells cognisable by the nose . . . Tastes 
cognisable by the tongue . . . Touches cognisable by the body, 
agreeable, pleasant, liked, enticing, connected with sensual pleasures, 
alluring. These, brahman youth, are the five strands of sense- 
pleasures. Brahman youth, the brahman Pokkharasati of the 
Upamanna (clan, incumbent) of the Subhaga forest glade, is en- 
slaved and infatuated by these five strands of sense-pleasures, he is 
addicted to them, and enjoys them without seeing the peril (in them), 
without knowing the escape (from them). This situation- certainly 
does not occur that he should know or see or realise states of further- 
men, the excellent knowledge and vision befitting the ariyans. 
What do you -think about this, brahman youth ? Which of these 
fires would have flame and hue and brightness: the fire that one 
could kindle from fuel of grass and dry sticks or the fire that one 
could kindle without fuel of grass and dry sticks V 9 

“ If it were possible, good Gotama, to kindle a fire without fuel of 
grass and dry sticks, that fire would have flame and hue and bright- 
ness.” 

“ That, is impossible, brahman youth, it cannot come to pass, 
that one should kindle a fire without fuel of grass and dry sticks — 
except through pyschic power. 1 1, brahman youth, say of this delight 
which is a delight on account of the five strands of sense-pleasures, 
that it is like the fire that burns on account of fuel of grass and dry 
sticks. [204] I, brahman youth, say of this dv-Hght which is a 
delight apart from pleasures of the senses, " ’in skilled 


1 As at the pdtihariya when Gotama kindled the matted-hair ascetics’ 
firewood at Vin . i. 31. 



II. 204-205 


With Subha 


393 


states of mind, that it is like the fire that burns because it is without 
fuel of grass and dry sticks. And what, brahman youth, is delight 
apart from pleasures of the senses, apart from unskilled states of 
mind ? As to this, brahman youth, a monk aloof from pleasures of 
the senses, aloof from unskilled states of mind, entering on the first 
meditation, abides therein. This, brahman youth, is delight apart 
from pleasures of the senses, apart from unskilled states of mind. 
And again, brahman youth, a monk, by allaying initial and sustained 
thought . . . entering on the second meditation, abides therein. 
This too, brahman youth, is delight apart from pleasures of the 
senses, apart from unskilled f /:* tes of mind. Brahman youth, those 
brahmans who lay down five things for the doing of good, for success 
in what is skilled — what is the thing of greatest fruit that these 
brahmans lay down for the doing of good, for success in what is 
skilled r 

“ Good Gotama, those brahmans who lay down five things for the 
doing of good, for success in what is skilled — renunciation is the 
thing of greatest fruit that these brahmans lay down for the doing of 
good, for success in what is skilled.” 

“What do you think about this, brahman youth ? Suppose a 
great sacrifice to be prepared here by a certain brahman, and that 
two brahmans should come along, thinking: 4 We will enjoy the 
great sacrifice of the brahman so-and-so/ and that one brahman 
should think : 4 O may I myself get the best seat in the refectory, 1 the 
best drinking water, the best food; may that (other) brahman not 
get the best seat in the refectory, the best drinking water, the best 
food— the other brahman is getting the best seat in the refectory, the 
best drinking water, the best food, I am not getting the best seat in 
the refectory, the best drinking water, the best food / thinking thus 
[205] he is angry and discontented — what result do brahmans lay 
down for him, brahman youth ?” 

4 4 But, as to this, good Gotama, brahmans do not give a gift, 
thinking : 4 Let the other be angry and discontented with this.’ For, 
as to this, brahmans give a gift simply out of compassion.” 

44 This being so, brahman youth, is this the sixth method of 
brahmans for doing good, that is to say compassion ?” 

44 This being so, good Gotama, this is the sixth method of brahmans 
for doing good, that is to say compassion.” 

44 Brahman youth, those brahmans who lay down five things for 


1 Cf. M. i. 28 t M.L.S. i. 35). 



394 


99. Subhasutta 


n. 206-206 


the doing of good, for success in what is skilled — where do you 
observe these five things abundantly: among householders or among 
those who have gone forth V 9 

“ Good Gotama, these five things that brahmans lay down for the 
doing of good, for success in what is skilled — I observe these five 
things abundantly in those who have gone forth, little among 
householders. For a householder, good Gotama, having a great 
deal to do: many duties, a large administration, great problems— is 
not constantly and consistently a truth-speaker. But one who has 
gone forth, good Gotama, having not a great deal to do : few duties, 
a small administration, small problems — is constantly and con- 
sistently a truthspeaker. A householder, good Gotama, having a 
great deal to do ... is not constantly and consistently a man of 
austerity, a chaste man, intent on study, intent on renunciation. 
But one who has gone forth, good Gotama, having not much to do: 
few duties, a small administration, small problems— is constantly 
and consistently a ‘ burner-up/ 1 a Brahma-farer, 2 intent on study, 
intent on renunciation. Those five things, good Gotama, that 
recluses and brahmans lay down for the doing of good, for success in 
what is skilled — I observe these five things abundantly among those 
who have gone forth, little among householders.” 

“ Those five things, brahman youth, that brahmans lay down for 
the doing of good, for success in what is skilled, [206] I say that these 
are equipments 3 of the mind, that is to say for developing a mind 
that is without enmity, without malevolence. Here, brahman 
youth, a monk is a truth-speaker. He, thinking, * I am a truth- 
speaker 5 acquires knowledge of the goal, 4 acquires knowledge of 
dhamma , acquires the rapture which is connected with dhamma . I 
say of that rapture which is connected with what is skilled 6 that it is 
an equipment of the mind, that is to say for developing a mind that 
is without enmity, without malevolence. Here, brahman youth, a 
monk is a bumer-up, he is a Brahma-farer, he is intent on study, he is 
intent on renunciation. He, thinking, ‘ I am intent on renunciation * 
acquires knowledge of the goal, acquires knowledge of dhamma , 
acquires the rapture which is connected with dhamma . I say of that 
rapture which is connected with what is skilled that it is an equip- 

1 tapassin, burning up wrong states of mind; “ man of austerity ” better 

suits the brahman mode of life. 

3 brakma-cdrin also means chaste. 

* parikkhdra; cf. citiaparikkhara at A . iv. 62. 4 Cf. M . i. 37. 

* kusalupasarhhiia , as at 8. ii. 220. 



II. 206-207 


With Subha 


395 


ment of the mind, that is to say for developing a mind that is without 
enmity, without malevolence. I say that those five things, brahman 
youth, that brahmans lay down for the doing of good, for success in 
what is skilled, are equipments of the mind, that is to say for devel- 
oping a mind that is without enmity, without malevolence.” 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s 
son, spoke thus to the Lord: “ I have heard, good Gotama, that the 
recluse Gotama knows the wuy to companionship with Brahma.” 1 

u What do you think about this, brahman youth ? Is Nalakara 
village near here ? Is Nalakara village not far from here 1” 

“ Yes, sir, Nalakara village is near here, Nalakara village is not far 
from here.” 

“ What do you think about this, brahman youth ? Suppose a 
man had been bom and bred here in Nalakara village, and that 
someone were to ask him who had never up to that time left Nalakara 
village the way to Nalakara village — would that man who had been 
bom and bred in Nalakara village hesitate or be at a loss when asked 
the way to Nalakara village ?” 

“ No, good Gotama. What is the reason for this ? It is that 
that man was bom and bred in Nalakara village; so all the roads to 
Nalakara village are well known to him.” 

“ Yet, brahman youth, there might be hesitation or being at a loss 
for that man who was born and bred in Nalakara village on being 
asked the way to Nalakara village. [207] But for the Tathagata 
there is neither hesitation nor being at a loss when he is asked about 
the Brahma-world or the course leading to the Brahma-world. 
And I, brahman youth, comprehend Brahma and the Brahma-world 
and the course leading to the Brahma-world; and that according to 
the faring is the uprising in the Brahma-world, that too I com- 
prehend.” 

“ I have heard, good Gotama, that the recluse Gotama teaches the 
way to companionship with Brahma. It would be good if the 
revered Gotama would teach me the way to companionship with 
Brahma.” 

“ Well then, brahman youth, listen and attend carefully, and I 
will speak.” ' 

“ Yes, sir,” the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, answered 
the Lord in assent. The Lord spoke thus: 

“ And what, brahman youth, is the way to companionship with 


1 CJ . M . ii. 194; D. i. 249. 




396 


99. Subhasutta 


II. 207-208 


Brahma ? As to this, brahman youth, a monk dwells having suffused 
the first quarter with a mind of friendliness, likewise the second, 
likewise the third, likewise the fourth; just so above, below, across; 
he dwells, having suffused the whole world everywhere, in every way 
with a mind of friendliness that is far-reaching, wide-spread, 
immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence. When, 
brahman youth, the freedom of mind that is friendliness has been 
developed thus, that deed which is done in a limited range does not 
rest there, does not remain there. 1 Brahman youth, as a stout 
conch-blower informs the four quarters without any difficulty, so, 
brahman youth, when the freedom of mind that is friendliness has 
been developed thus, that deed which is done in a limited range 
does not rest there, does not remain there. This, brahman youth, is 
a way to companionship with Brahma. 

And again, brahman youth, a monk dwells having suffused the 
first quarter with a mind of compassion . . . with a mind of sym- 
pathetic joy . . . with a mind of equanimity, likewise the second, 
likewise the third, likewise the fourth; just so above, below, across; 
he dwells having suffused the whole world everywhere, in every way, 
with a mind of equanimity that is far-reaching, wide-spread, [208] 
immeasurable, without enmity, without malevolence. When, 
brahman youth, the freedom of mind that is equanimity has been 
developed thus, that deed which is done in a limited range does not 
rest there, does not remain there. Brahman youth, as a stout 
conch-blower informs the four quarters without any difficulty, so, 
brahman youth, when the freedom of mind that is equanimity has 
been developed thus, that deed which is done in a limited range does 
not rest there, does not remain there. This too, brahman youth, is 
a way to companionship with Brahma.” 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s 
son spoke thus to the Lord: “ It is excellent, good Gotama, it is 
excellent, good Gotama. It is as if one might set upright what had 
been upset, or disclose what was covered, or show the way to one 
who had gone astray, or bring an oil lamp into the darkness so that 


1 See also D . i. 251 ; S. iv. 322; A , v. 299; and cf, Ja. ii. 61 which regards 
pamdna as equivalent to paritta, small. All the Comys, (except Ja. ii. 62) take 
pamanakata karhma as equivalent to Jcamdvacara , “ that which pertains to the 
senseB and their corresponding objects.” It seems that the small deed or the 
deed done in the limited range (such as is being thought of in this context) 
cannot remain and give its own result unless it is “ covered ” ( ajjhottharitvd ) 
by a large deed. 



IT. 208-209 


With Subha 


397 


those with vision might see material shapes — even so in many a 
figure has dhamma been made clear by the good Gotama. I myself 
am going to the honoured Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to 
the Order of monks. May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay- 
disciple going for refuge from today forth for as long as life lasts. 
But, please, good Gotama, we are going now, we are very busy and 
there is much to be done.” 

“ You must do now, brahman youth, that for which you deem it 
to be the right time.” 

Then the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, having rejoiced in 
what the Lord had said, having given thanks, rising from his seat, 
having greeted the Lord, departed keeping his right side towards 
him. 

Now at that time the brahman Janussoni was leaving Savatthi 
early in the day in a chariot (drawn by) all-white mules. The 
brahman Janussoni saw the brahman youth Subha, Todeyya’s son, 
coming in the distance; and seeing him, he spoke thus to the brah- 
man youth Subha, Todeyya’s son: “ Now, where is the good Bhara- 
dvaja coming from so early in the day 1” 

“ I, sir, am coming from the recluse Gotama.” 

“ What do you think about this, good Bharadvaja ? Has 
the recluse Gotama lucidity of wisdom ? Do you think him 
clever I” 1 

[209] “ But who am I, sir, that I should know whether the recluse 
Gotama has lucidity of wisdom ? Surely only one like him could 
know whether the recluse Gotama has lucidity of wisdom ?” 

“ Undoubtedly it is with lofty praise that the revered Bharadvaja 
praises the recluse Gotama.” 

“ But who am I that I should praise the recluse Gotama % 
Praised by the praised is the revered Gotama, chief among devas and 
men. And, sir, the recluse Gotama speaks of those five things that 
brahmans lay down for the doing of good, for success in what is 
skilled, as equipments of the mind, that is for developing a mind that 
is without enmity, without malevolence.” 

When this had been said, the brahman Janussoni, having got 
down from his chariot (drawn by) all-white mules, having arranged 
his upper cloth over one shoulder, having saluted the Lord with 
joined palms, uttered this solemn utterance: “ It is a gain for King 
Pasenadi of Kosala, it is well gotten by King Pasenadi of Kosala 


1 This passage, to “ devas and men,” also at M. i. 175. 



99. Subhasutta 


398 


II. 209-210 


that the Tathagata, perfected one, fully Self-Awakened One, is 
staying in his kingdom.” 1 


Discourse with Subha: 
The Ninth 


100. DISCOURSE TO SANGARAVA 

(Sangaravasutta) 2 

Thus have I heard : At one time the Lord was walking on tour among 
the Kosalans together with a large Order of monks. Now at that 
time the brahman lady called Dhananjani, 3 who had confident belief 
in the Awakened One, in dhamma and in the Order, was residing in 
Candalakappa. 4 Then the brahman lady Dhananjani, having 
tripped, 5 three times uttered this solemn utterance: “ Praise to that 
Lord, perfected One, fully Self-Awakened One. Praise to that 
Lord, perfected one, fully Self- Awakened One. Praise to that Lord, 
perfected one, [210] fully Self-Awakened One.” Now at that time 
the brahman youth Sangarava was residing in Candalakappa; he 
was master of the three Vedas, 6 versed in the vocabularies and 
rituals together with the phonology and exegesis and the legendary 
tradition as the fifth; he was learned in idioms, a grammarian, 
proficient in popular philosophy and the marks of a Great Man. 
The brahman youth Sangarava heard what the brahman lady 

1 Such a “ gain ” is karmic in its nature. 

* Six other & tangdravasuttas are given in DPPN., but probably not all were 
addressed to the Sangarava of this M. Sta. 

3 See S. i. 160; and K.S. i. 199, n. 1,2. 

4 There are several v.ll, for this name, MA. iii. 451 for example reading 
Mandalakappa. It was a little village. 

5 The text reading is upakkhalitva , which means having tripped or stumbled; 
S. i. 160 (in a rather different context) reads upakkamitva , having approached 
or gone on to, with v.l. upakkhalitva ; MA. iii. 451 reads pakkhalitvd , which 
can mean either “ having washed ” or “ having stumbled.” Brahmans often 
wash before a ceremonial event, but I have chosen to render by “ tripped ” 
in conformity with the textual meaning. The uddna (solemn utterance) 
would then be an expression used for warding off the ill-luck which might 
otherwise ensue after stumbling. Cf. Mhvu , iii. 223. 

• As at M. ii. 133. 



IL 210-211 To Sangarava 399 

DhananjanI was saying; on hearing it he spoke thus to the brahman 
lady DhananjanI; “ This brahman lady DhananjanI is mean, this 
brahman lady DhananjanI is disgraced in that, while there are 
brahmans in existence, she speaks in praise of this little shaveling 
recluse.” 

“ But do not you, dear learned friend, 1 2 know this Lord’s moral 
habit and wisdom* ? If you, dear learned friend, were to know 
this Lord’s moral habit and wisdom, you, dear learned friend, would 
not consider that this Lord should be abused and reviled.” 

“ Well then, lady, if the recluse Gotama arrives in Candalakappa, 
you might let me know.” 

“ Yes, learned friend,” the brahman lady DhananjanI an- 
swered the brahman youth Sangarava in assent. 

Then as the Lord was walking on tour among the Kosalans he 
gradually arrived at Candalakappa. While he was there the Lord 
stayed in the mango grove of the brahmans of Tudi. 3 4 Then the 
brahman lady DhananjanI heard that the Lord had arrived at 
Candalakappa and was staying in the mango grove of the brahmans 
of Tudi. Then the brahman lady DhananjanI approached the 
brahman youth Sangarava; having approached, she spoke thus to 
the brahman youth Sangarava; “ Dear learned friend, this Lord has 
arrived at Candalakappa and is staying in the mango grove of the 
brahmans of Tudi. Dear learned friend, you must do now that for 
which you think it the right time.” 

“ Yes, lady,” and the brahman youth Sangarava, having answered 
the brahman lady DhananjanI in assent, approached the Lord; 
having approached, he exchanged greetings with the Lord; having 
[211] conversed in a friendly and courteous way, he sat down at a 
respectful distance. As he was sitting down at a respectful distance, 
Sangarava the brahman youth spoke thus to the Lord ; 

“ There are, good Gotama, some recluses and brahmans who claim 
that, in regard to the fundamentals of the Brahma-faring/ they 


1 bhadramukha , as at M. ii. 53. See above, p. 249, n. 1. 

2 sUapannaTia , as at D . i. 124. See note at Dial. i. 156. 

3 Todeyyanarh brahmananarh. These brahmans were so-called because 
they lived in Tudi (-gama). Only the one was called Todeyya because he was 
the head of these; see above, p. 386, n, 1. 

4 MA. iii. 453 says of adibrahmacariyam: brahmacariyassa adibhuia nppa- 
dakajdnakd ti, which seems to mean that they were producers and generators 
of the Brahma-faring; but the grammar is against this. I think it more 
likely that the “ fundamentals of the Brahma-faring ” refer to “ the practices 
that have been pointed out by me for disciples,” enumerated in M . Sta. 77. 



400 100. SafigSrawsutta II. 211 

have attained here-now to excellence and to going beyond through 
super-knowledge. 1 Among those recluses and brahmans, good 
Gotama, who claim that, in regard to the fundamentals of the 
Brahma-faring, they have attained here-now to excellence and to 
going beyond through super-knowledge— of which (sort) is the 
revered Gotama V* 

“ I, Bharadvaja, say that there is a difference among those who 
claim that, in regard to the fundamentals of the Brahma-faring, they 
have attained here-now to excellence and to going beyond through 
super-knowledge. There are, Bharadvaja, some recluses and brahmans 
who depend on report; 2 these claim that it is through report that, in 
regard to the fundamentals of the Brahma-faring, they have attained 
here-now to excellence and to going beyond through super-knowledge 
— such as the three-Veda-brahmans. But there are, Bharadvaja, 
some recluses and brahmans who with only mere faith claim that, 
in regard to the fundamentals of the Brahma-faring, they have 
attained here-now to excellence and to going beyond through super- 
knowledge — such as reasoners and investigators. 3 There are, 
Bharadvaja, some recluses and brahmans who by fully understanding 
dhamma of themselves only, 4 * although these truths had not been 
heard before, 6 * claim that, in regard to the fundamentals of the 
Brahma-faring, they have attained here-now to excellence and to 
going beyond through super-knowledge. Now, Bharadvaja, I am 
one of those recluses and brahmans who by fully understanding 
dhamma of themselves only, although these truths had not been 
heard before, claim that, in regard to the fundamentals of the 
Brahma-faring, they have attained here-now to excellence and to 
going beyond through super-knowledge. You must understand it in 
this way, Bharadvaja, that I am one of those recluses and brahmans 
who by fully understanding dhamma of themselves only, although 
these truths had not been heard before, claim that, in regard to the 
fundamentals of the Brahma-faring, they have attained here-now 
to excellence and to going beyond through super-knowledge. 

As to this,® Bharadvaja, before my Self-awakening while I was still 


1 abhinndvosdnaparamippatta . Cf. M. ii. 11 ff. (see above, p. 211, n. 2). 

2 Cf. M . i. 520, anussavika. 8 Cf. M, i. 520, takki-vimamsi. 

4 I.e, not learning it or hearing it from others; cf. Vin . i. 8, na me dcariyo 

atthi, “ I have no teacher,” 

6 As at Am iii. 9; c/. D. ii. 33; S . ii. 9, 106. “ Truths ” is dhammesu, which 

AA. iii. 225 explains as catn-saccadhammesu . Dhamma can also mean things; 

or mental states, elements or ultimates, • As at M. i. 240. 



II. 211-212 


401 


To Sangarava 

the bodhisalta , not fully awakened, it occurred to me: Narrow is the 
household life, a path of dust, going forth is in the open, nor is it easy 
while dwelling in a house to lead the Brahma-faring completely 
fulfilled, completely purified, polished like a conch-shell. Suppose 
now that I, having cut off hair and beard, having donned saffron 
garments, should go forth from home into homelessness ? So I, 
Bharadvaja, [212] after a time, being young, my hair coal-black, 
possessed of radiant youth, in the prime of my life . . . (repeat from 
M, i. p . 163, l, 28 to p. 167, l. 8 — M.L.S. i. p, 207 to p , 211; for monks 
read Bharadvaja) ... So I, Bharadvaja, sat down just there, thinking: 
‘ Indeed this does well for striving/ 

Moreover, Bharadvaja, three similes occurred to me . . . (repeal from 
M, i. p . 240, I. 29 to p, 247, I. 16 — i. p . 295 to p . 302, but 
omitting “ But yet that painful feeling . . . persisted without im- 
pinging on my mind, on pp. 297, etc,, and 299) . . . saying: * The 
recluse Gotama lives in abundance, he is wavering in his striving, he 
has reverted to a life of abundance/ 

But when I, Bharadvaja, had taken some material nourishment, 1 * 
having picked up strength, aloof from pleasures of the senses ... I 
entered on and abided in the first meditation ... By allaying initial 
and discursive thought, with the mind subjectively tranquillised and 
fixed on one point, I entered and abided in the second meditation 
... I entered and abided in the third meditation. 3 

With the mind composed thus, quite purified, quite clarified, 
without blemish, without defilement, grown soft and workable . . . 
(repeat from M, L p, 248, line 19 to p, 249, line 21 — M,L,S, i. p, 302 
to p. 303, substituting Bharadvaja for Aggivessana, and omitting 
“ But yet that pleasurable feeling . . . persisted without impinging on 
my mind ’*) . . . even as I abided diligent, ardent, self-resolute/* 
When this had been said, the brahman youth Sangarava spoke thus 
to the Lord: 

“ Indeed the good Gotama’s striving was steadfast, 3 indeed it was 
that of a true man 4 such as that of a perfected one, a fully Self- 
Awakened One. But now, good Gotama, are there devas I” 5 
" Certainly, Bharadvaja, it is known to me that there are devas” 


1 As at M. i. 247. 

8 The fourth meditation, not mentioned here, is I think omitted in error. 

8 atthita . This is a case of tmesis, for atphita is to be taken with padhana . 
The meaning may more properly be that the striving was that of (or, worthy 
of) a steadfast man. 

4 mppurisa, also a case of tmesis. 


4 Cf, M. ii. 130 (above, p. 311). 



402 100. SwhgdravasuUa II. 212-213 

“ But why do you, good Gotama, on being asked if there are devas 
say that it is certainly known to you that there are devas V Even if 
this is so, good Gotama, is it not a vain falsehood V 9 

“ If on being asked, Bharadvaja, ‘ Are there devas V [213] one 
should say: ‘ There are devas 9 and should say: ‘ Certainly they are 
known to me/ then the conclusion to be reached by an intelligent 
person is indubitable, namely that there are devas ” 

“ But why did not the revered Gotama explain this to me at the 
beginning V* 

“ It is commonly 1 agreed in the world, Bharadvaja, that there are 
devas 99 

When this had been said, the brahman youth Sangarava spoke thus 
to the Lord : 

“ It is excellent, good Gotama, it is excellent, good Gotama. It is 
as if, good Gotama, one might set upright what had been upset, or 
might disclose what was covered, or might show the way to one who 
had gone astray, or bring an oil-lamp into the darkness so that those 
with vision might see material shapes — even so in many a figure has 
dhamma been made clear by the good Gotama. I am going to the 
Lord 2 Gotama for refuge and to dhamma and to the Order of monks. 
May the revered Gotama accept me as a lay-disciple going for refuge 
from this day forth for as long as life lasts.” 

Discourse to Sangarava: 

The Tenth 

Division on Brahmans: 

The Fifth 

TOLD ARE THE MIDDLE FIFTY 


1 ucce. MA . iii. 454 says uccena saddena sammatam (v.l. samma) pdkajam 
matarh lokasmirh , with a loud noise agreed upon by the usual thought of the 
world. 

* Reading here is bhagavarUarh . 




INDEXES 


I — TOPICS 


Abide, to, 149 /., 153 /. 

Abider { vihari ), 138 ff. 

Abiding, living: in comfort, 21, 108, 
138 jjj?., 146 /., 293 /., 308, 324, 
327; in ease, xi, xxvii, 20, 22 ff., 
131 /.; in friendliness . . . equani- 
mity, 34 /.; Brahma-, 269 /., 272. 
See also Friendliness 
Achieve, to ( papunati ), 173 ff. 

Act of Information, xxvii 
Action, effective, operative: (kiriya), 
74#, 161, 357; (saheluka) 375 
Activity ( sahkhara ), 57 /., 96, 106 /., 
151 n . ; of striving, 212 
Adept, ten endowments of, 118 /. 
Affection, born of, 192 ff. 

Agriculture, 369, 387 /. 

Air (akdsa), 95 

All-knowing, all-seeing, 159 /., 199, 
228/., 309 

Allowable (kappati), 35, 133, 300; 
not, 133, 353 

Alms, regular supply, 353 /. 

Almsfood, 11, 34, 120/,, 256; content 
with, 207/. 

Aloof, 111/., 136/., 207, 209; -ness, 
105, 126, 207, 209, 213, 215 /. See 
also Meditation 
Ancestors ( pubbapeta ), 373 ff. 

Anger, ill-will, discontent, 114 /. 

Angry, discontented, 393 
Angry wrath (kodhupdyasa), 132 
Anguish ( dukkha ), 132 ff., 136/., 211, 
330; destruction of, 22, 283, 310; 
end of, 139/., 198; origin, stopping 
of, 190 /.; root of, 126; truths of, 

13, 101, 113, 153 n., 211, 235, 248, 
330. See also Meditation 
Animal(s), xxxi, 5, 236 .n.; birth, 
womb, 55 /., 377 

Annihilation-ism, 177 n., 180 n.; 
ist, 176 n. 

Apathy ( tandl ), 136/. 

Arahant, xvi, xxxii, 304 n. Se'e also 
Perfected one(s) 

Ariyan: birth, xviii, 289; control, 

11 /.; dhamma, 369; disciple, xviii, 

403 


20 ff., 21 ff., 179; discipline, 25 ff.. 
Ill; discrimination, 282-3, 310; 
growth. 111; mindfulness, 12; 
moral habit, 11 /., 357; vision, 189; 
scoffers at, 13, 71 /., 75 /., 174, 
220; un-, 126. See also Meditation 
Assembly hall, 353/. 

Attachment, aversion, confusion, 
34/., 139/., 173. Of. Greed, etc. 
Attachment, fetters, delight, etc.. Ill 
Austerity ( tapo ), 233, 348, 388, 394 
Avocations (vohara), 26 ff. 

Awake (buddka), 329/., 337, 339 
Awakened One, 291 /,, 335; with 
dhamma, 283, 398. See under Lord 
Awakening, seven limbs of, 213 

Barber, 268/., 272 

Bathe, to, 8, 244; ceremonially, xix, 
296, 303 

Becoming(s) (bhava), xxi, 80 /.; 
again-, 137 ; cord of, 291 ; fetters of, 
4, 150, 168, 201. See also Cankers, 
the three 

Beds, high, large, 10 
Beings (bhuta), xxiii, 57, 15 ff. ; (satta), 
xii, 13, 23/., 31, 103, 116, 160, 174, 
184/., 187. See also Creatures 
Better (seyyo), 374 /., 377 ; with worse 
( pdpiyo ), 367 /. 
bkunahu , xv/., 181 n. 

Bile, phlegm, etc., 92 
Birth (jati), 381; ariyan, 289; pure, 
355 ff., 379; there is, 100 /.; with 
ageing and dying, xvii, 100/., 132, 
134, 136/., 330; destroyed is birth, 
etc., 14, 59, 82, 113, 175, 179, 192, 

201 , 235 , 238 , 255 , 289 , 339 

Blame, blamable (avajja), 37 /., 
41 ff.; -less(ness) ( anavajja(td ) ), 11, 
21, 34/., 42, 324. 

Bodhisatta, xxix, 135 n., 281, 320 n ., 
401 ; mother of, 1 16 n. 

Body, 189, 194, 215 ff., 223 /., 303, 
325, 373; contemplating, 4; made 
of four elements, 179, 194, 217; 
mind-made, 217 



404 Index of Topics 


Body, speech, 362; and mind, 13, 21, 
36//., 57/., 71/., 74/., 77/., 88 ff., 
134, 174, 185, 225 ( and mode of 
livelihood), 298 /.; and intention, 
mode of livelihood, 223 ff '. 

Bond ( bandhana ), 121 ff. 

Bourn (gati), 13, 55/., 71 ff., 174, 331, 
342/. 

Bovine ascetic, 54 ff. 

Bowl, 207/., 256, 323 n., 324/. 
Brahma; -become, xxxi, 5 /., 8, 14, 
82, 337/., 351 /.; - vihara (abiding) 
xxx ff., 269 /., 272, (see a/so 
Friendliness); -world, xxix, 131, 
173, 218, 269/., 272, 377 /T. 

Brahma-farer, xxix, 90, 111 /., 132 /., 
141 /., 169 ff., 248, 277, 300, 312, 
394 

Brahma-faring, xxii, 9, 21 /., 59, 70, 
82, 98 ff., 113, 151, 153, 170 ff., 
175, 191, 201 /., 206, 234 ff., 251 /., 
255, 258, 269, 281, 283, 289, 303/., 
306 /., 318, 330, 339, 348, 401; 
brought to a close, see Birth 
destroyed; comfortless, 193, 198 ff.; 
delight in, 135 /.; fundamental to, 
101, 399/.; well taught, 338; non- 
(four ways of living), 193 ff. 

Brahman(8), ix, xviii ff., xxix /., 
181 /., 222 n., 273 ff., 290 ( voc .), 
306, 317 ff., 326 /., 333 ff., 340 ff., 
355 ff., 366 ff., 377, 379 ff., 388/., 
393; and householders, 251 /., 268, 
270 ff., 326, 329; company of, 
334 /., 338 /., 340 /., 358; house- 
holders, 69 ff., 354 /., 372; how is 
one? 379 ff.; lay down five things, 
388 /. ; parents, 348 f . ; race ( pajd ), 
357; seers, 347 ff., 360, 389; wives, 
341. See also Caste; Nobles. . . . 

Breathing in, out, 91 /., 96 

Brief: spoken of in, 27; to teach in, 
167/. 

Buddha(s), ix, xvi /., xix, xxiv /., 
xxvii, 3, 127 n ., 161 »., 291 n. 

Burden : shed, 4 

4 Burner-up ’ (tapassin), 394 

Calm and vision ( samatha , vipassana), 
173 

Canine ascetic, x, 54 ff. 

Cankers ( asava ), xxxi, 116 /.; des- 
troyed, 4, 152 ff., 201 /.; destruc- 
tion of, xii, xxxii, 13, 15 ff., 23 /., 
31, 106 /., 160, 168 /., 175, 221; 


freed from, 14, 15 ff., 180; got rid 
of by TathSgata, 137; three, 14, 
113, 235; truths of, 13, 113, 235 
Carpenter, 64 ff. 

Caste(s), xx, xxii, 273 ff., 310 /., 314, 
340 ff., 370 /. 

Cattle, 56; -butcher, 8, 28, 82 
Causal basis ( sanidana ), 210 
Cause ( hetu ), xvii n., xxiii, 27, 76 ff., 
310 /., 313, 375; 4 there is (no),’ 

etc* s 76 ff, 

Causeway (sarlkama), xiv, 110 
Chariot, 63, 270 ff., 385, 397 ; see also 
Elephant; -eer, 63, 270 ff. 

Chastity ( brahmacariya ), 388 
Chief ( mukha ), 338 /. 

Clear consciousness, 12 
Clinging (upadhi), 105 ff,, 125 /. 

4 Come, monk \ 59 n.» 286, 338 n. 
Companies ( parisd ), two, 351 
Compassion, 27, 95, 269, 297, 300, 
352, 375 /., 393; mind of, 16, 34, 
269, 378, 396 
Comport oneself, 1 1 
Concentration: as faculty, 154, 212. 

See also Meditation 
Conception (gabbhassa avakkanti), 349 
Conduct (carana), xi /., 24 
Conference hail, 8, 18 /., 130 
Consciousness ( vinnana ), 217 (see also 
Material shape, as khandha ); in- 
finite, 17, 68, 106, 128, 213 
Control, 11 /., 20/. 

Conviction (vesdrajja), 169 /. 
Convincing (sappdtihariya), 210 
Cough, -ing, 205 /., 302/., 305 
Course (palipada), 211 ff.; reasoned, 
232 

Covetousness, 11 /., 20/., 168 
Craving ( tanha ), 168, 183 ff.; des- 
truction of 106 /. 

Creature(s) (satta), 57 /., 76 ff. See 
also Beings 
Curse, to, 348 

Custom ( vatta ), lovely, 269, 272 
Dancing, etc., 10 

Deathless (amata): door to, xxxii, 18; 
-element, xiv, 106; -ness, 188 /., 
211 n.; plunge into, 383 n .; 
quarter, 24 n. 

Debating hall, 204 

Deed(s), (kamma), xxiii, 13, 23 /., 31, 
36 ff., 57 /. (4 kinds), 88 ff., 160, 
174, 194 /., 235, 271, 384/., 396; 



405 


Index of Topics 


destruction of, 57 /. See also 
Deva-vision; Kamma 
Defilements ( kilesa ), 137 
Delight ( plti ), 392/.; (rati), 184 ff . . 
Deliverance (vippamokkha), 238 /. 
Deliverances, (eight), 110 n., 145, 
162#., 213 
Demon ( pisdca ), 121 
Departed, realm of, 377 
Dependence, to live in ( upanissaya 
viharaii ), 204 #, 221 
Denotation (sahkha), 166 
Desire ( chanda ), 155, 225 #, 362, 364 
Destroyer of growth ( bhunahu ), xv, 
181# 

Deva(s), xx, 9, 21, 49, 55 #, 69, 232, 
311 #, 317, 377 (listed); 401 /.; 
formless, 80/.; -hearing, 173, 182, 
219; -like happiness, 184/.; -like 
vehicle, 271; made by mind, by 
perceiving, 80 /.; Mind attached, 
41; of the Thirty -Three, 185, 
270/., 312 /., 377; -vision, xii, 13, 
23 f., 31, 113, 160, 174, 220, 229, 
(235), 237, 238 n.; who are retur- 
ners (dgantar), 312 /.; -world, 
224 n., 271 n. 

devatd , 111 /., 175, 234, 357, 373/. 
Devices (toirza), ten, 215 
Dhamma, xvii, xxii, xxx/., 45, 104 #, 
155, 170//., 202, 283, 290, 303#, 
330 /., 350, 352; ariyan, 369; 
delight in, 15 #., 106; deep, etc., 
165, 281, 362; disquisition on, 117; 
-farer, xxix, 374 /.; four expoun- 
dings of, 261 /.; Further ( abhi - 
dhamma ), 145; further ( uttari ), 173; 
knowers of, 155, 365-6; -knowledge, 
394; 4 lovely at the beginning \ 
etc., 9, 69, 251, 318; -man, 160, 
268, 270, 318; man's wealth, 369; 
speaker on, 10, 340 /.; striving 
after, 110, 151, 153; ‘sure’ (ap- 
annaka ), 70 #; talk on, 193, 

245 /., 251, 305 /., 325 /., 333; 
taught, 66, 105, 148/.; taught for 
control, 183; testimonies to, 307; 
true ( saddhamma ), 71 #, 116, 121, 
190; -vision, 45, 180, 330; well 
taught, 303 #.; wheel of, 337; to 
fare by, 271 /.; to hear, 9, 155, 362, 
364/.; to remember, 155, 362, 364; 
to speak, 228; to teach, 9, 26, 28, 
56, 69, 117, 189 /., 205/., 210, 229, 
238, 362; to understand, 251 #, 


400; and discipline, xvii, 59, 130, 
132, 134, 155, 172, 191, 202, 205 /., 
70 /.; non-dhamma-farer, -ing, 
o 73 /. See also Refuge 
Digestion, good, 260, 282 
Diligence ( appamada ), 150 #, 291 
Diligent, 372 /. with ardent, self- 
resolute, 15 #, 59, 191, 255, 281, 
306, 339, 401 

Disciple(s), xi /., xviii, xxii, xxix, 
20 #, 138, 141, 156, 168 #, 179, 
192, 205 #, 223, 305; course for, 
211 #; instruction from, 210; 
ways of revering Gotama, 205 #. 
Discipline (vinaya): ariyan, 26 #., 
Ill; Further ( ahhivinaya ), 145; 
speaker on, 10. See also Dhamma 
and discipline 

Dismiss, to (panameti), 129 # 
Dispute, 177 /., 305 
d ittha dhamma su kkav ihdra , xi. See 
Abiding in ease 
Dog, 54/., 199 
Door-bolt, 209, 302 /. 

Doubt: to, 248; crossed over, 169/., 
180, 330. See also Hindrances 
Dwelling-place ( vihdra ), 18, 302 /., 
353 

Earnest study (yoga), 145 /, 

Earth, 94, 194; clod of ( leddu ), 289; 

to dig the, 248. See also Elements 
Eat, to, 146; little, 206 /.; with 
partake of, etc., 133, 146 # 
Eel-wriggling (amaravikkhepa) 200 
Effected and thought out (abhisan- 
. khata ahhisaiicetayita ), xxxii, 15# 
Effort ( ussdha ), 155, 362/. 

Elements: (dhatu), 173; five, 92 #; 
(bhutd), four, 194 

Elephant, 5, 88, 199, 297; -look, 
323 n -riding, 281 /.; -rug, 259, 
297; with horse, (chariot), etc., 
262#, 286, 300, 310, 323 n. 
Eminence ( visrn ), 283 
Eminence, lofty ( uldra ), 201 
Energy, 22, 144, 156, 225 #, 282, 311; 

faculty, 154, 212 
Enticing device, 40, 46 # 

Eon : see under Kalpa 
Equanimity, xxxii, 23, 28 #, 95; 
abiding in, 35; mind of, 16, 34, 
378, 396. See also Meditation 
Escape ( nissarana ), 34, 103 /., 392 
Eternal-ism, 177 n.; -ist, 180 n . 



406 


Index of Topics 


Ether ( akdsa ), 194; infinite, 17, 68, 
106, 128, 151 n., 213 
Even, uneven-farer, -ing, 373 jf. 
Exhortation (ovada), to accept, 169 jf. 
Exposition (veyy&icarana), fourfold, 
155 

Extension-element (patham), 92 
Eye, ear, etc., 11, 20, 66, 126, 183 jf., 
237, 392 

Factor ( anga ), 24 n„ 110 ff. 

Faculties ( indriya ), 107, 125 /., 239, 
292; five, 154, 21? 

Faith (saddhd), 9, 21, 70, 115, 133 /., 
135, 138/., 141, 153 jf., 189, 281/., 
310 /., 360 jf., 365, 372, 400; as 
faculty, 154, 212; and moral habit, 
etc., 138 jf., 368; freed through, 
striving after, 110/., 151, 153 /. 
Families: despised, etc., 344/., (371); 
noble, etc., 344 /., (371); to visit, 
142 

Feeling(s) ( vedand ), x /., 21, 57 /., 
65 /. (numbered), 324; contem- 
plating, 4 ; three, 65, 149/., 179. See 
also Material Shape (as a Jchandha) 
Fetters) (samyojana), xxxii, 27, 81, 
128, 177; five, xxxii, 1 5 jf., 102 jf., 
138 jf., 169/., 248, 332; three 139/. 
See also Becoming 
Fettered, un-, 125 /. 

Fire, 94, 165/., 184, 311, 344/., 369, 
371, 392; blaze of, 231; -room, 
181 /.'; -stick, 344/., (371). See also 
Elements 
Fisherfolk, 129 

Five points, not to transgress, 201 
Food, 120, 324; at one session, 108. 

See also Meal 
Foreign cloth, 300 

Forest, 141 .jf. ; -gone monk, 141 jf., 
288 

Formless, -ness, xxi, 79 jf. 

Freed (vimutta), 14, 15 jf., 105, 
138 jf., 179, 235; both ways, 110 /., 
151; by profound knowledge, 4, 
150, 168, 201, 239; from cankers, 
14, 113, 180, 235; through faith, 
110 /., 151, 153; through wisdom, 
110/., 151/. 

Freedom, xxii. 23, 179, 235, 311; 
bliss of, 290; of adept, 227; of 
mind, 396, (with through wisdom), 
23 /., 31, 107, 160, 168/., 175, 221, 
226 


Fnend of the lovely, the evil, 143, 
151, 153/. 

Friendliness, 34, 95; mind of, 16, 33, 
236 n., 269, 343, 370, 378, 396 
‘ From doing *, etc., 73 jf., 195 
Fruits: great and small, 387 /.; 
greatest, 393; one of two, 156; of a 
tree, 30/. 

Further-men, conditions of, 11 /., 
146, 390 jf. 

Future state ( samparaya ), 55 /., 

310, 328/., 331 

Gain, fame, 116, 138, 141, 203 
Gamblers, 293 
gandhabba, 349 
Garlands, etc., 10 

Get rid of (pajahatha), 127 /., 149 /. 
Gift, 393 

‘ Gladly would I be reduced ’, etc., 
156 

Glow-worm (kimi), 231, 237 
Gluttony, 133 

Go forth, to; gone forth, 9, 59, 
132 jf., 135 /., 146, 153 /., 172, 
175, 191, 246, 251 jf., 260 jf., 269 /., 
272, 277, 281, 283, 287, 305/., 319, 
335, 338/., 357, 370/., 386/., 394, 
401 

Goal (attha), 4, 10, 62 /., 101, 146, 
150, 168, 307, 329, 391, 394; 
(pariyosana), 153/., 175, 191, 255, 
281, 283, 289, 306, 339 
Going beyond (paraml), 211 jf., 
400 

Going forth, the (pabbajja), 59, 172, 
191, 236, 246, 252 jf., 286, 305, 
338, 401 

Gold, 257, 263 /., 357 ; and silver, 10, 
248, 274, 352/. 

Good health, 108, 146 jf., 282, 311 
Gradual: accomplishing, 304, 306; 

training, stc>, 154 
Grasping(s), 28 jf., 177, 190/. 

Great Man, marks of, xx, xxii, 317 jf., 
327 jf.; 334 jf., 340, 356, 358, 
398 

Greatness (mahatta), 116 

Greed, aversion, confusion, 168, 361/. 

cf. Attachment, etc. 

Grey hairs, 268 /. 

Grief, sorrow, suffering, etc., 292 jf. 
Growth, furthering in (rumhaniya), 
156 

Guest (atithi), 358, 373/. 



Index of Topics 


Habitations, former, xii, xvii, 13, 
23 /., 31, 113, 100, 161 n., 174, 
220, 229, 235, 238 n., 330 
Habitual tendencies ( sankhdra ). See 
under Material Shape (as a khandka) 
Hair of the head, body, etc., 92 
Happiness (sukha), xxxii, 0, 05, 67 jf., 
126 /., 130 ff., 141, 184 /., 237 /., 
249/., 281, 292/., 351 
Harming, 95, 226; non-, 227 
Heat, 194; -element, 92 
Health ( arogya ), 188 ff.; ( appabadha ), 
282 

Heard much, 22 

Heaven, xvii, xxvi, 161 /., 330; talk 
on, 45, 330; -world, 13, 73, 76, 79, 
174, 185, 221, 270, 343 
Higher thought ( adhiciUa ), 123 /. 
Hindrances, 27, 45, 330; the five, 12, 
201, 234, 392, ( with discontent and 
apathy) 136 
Horse -trainer, 117 /. 

House, 323 /., 401 

Householder(s), ixff., 4, 9, 26 /., 33/., 
38, 65, 69 ff., 120, 133 /., 161, 
169 ff., 223, 251 /., 292 /., 361, 
380 /., 394; *s fetters, 161. See also 
Brahmans; Nobles. 

Human: beings, 5; strength, etc., 156 
Hut leaking, 249 /. 

* I am *, 96 

* I am the doer . . 165 

* If this is . . xvii, 229 /. 

Ignorance, bond of, xxxiii, 238 /.; 

canker of, 14, 113, 235 
111, end-maker of, 161 
Illness, 260, 263, 304 
Impermanence, 96 

Impermanent, 15 ff.; with com- 
pounded . . . liable to stopping, 
179; with suffering, a disease, etc., 
105/., 179 

Individual (purisapuggala), 148; four 
qualities, 223/.; ten qualities, 224, 
227 * (pug gala), differences among, 
69, 172,191 ‘ 

Individuality (attahhdva), 229, 369 
Intention (cetana), 42; (sarhkappa), 
223 /.; unskilled, skilled, 226 /.; 
-ally ( sahcicca ), 201, 289 

Jain(s), xii, 36#., 44#., 50, 62, 222 n . 

kalpa (kappa), (eon), xvii, 01, 101, 
190 n. 


407 

kamma, xii, xvii, xxiii, 101, 264, 266 /., 
290/., 304, 357, 375; - vadin , 161 n. 
See also Deed(s) 
kasina, 213 n., 215 n., 304 n. 
kathdvatthu, xx, 293 n., (309), (313) 
Kill, to, 33, 35 

King, 8, 187, 209, 269, 287, 303 /., 
336 /., 339, 372 ff. ; wheel-turning, 
318, 320 n., 330/. 

Kissing the feet, xix, xxv /., 303, 
330 

Know and see, to, 13-14, 113, 189 /., 
194#., 210, 214/., 235, 238, 260/., 
310, 330, 359/., 362, 390, 392; not, 
98, 230. See also under Lord 
Knowledge (vijjd): three-fold, xi /., 
xx xi /., 24, 160, 176, 292; -man, 
329. See also Habitations 
Knowledge, profound (anna), 4, 116 /., 
138 /., 156; gradual attainment of, 
154. See also Freed 
Knowledge-and-vision, 169 /., 199, 
202, 210, 228/., 309 

Lay-devotee, -disciple, -follower 
( updsaka ), xii, xxiii ff., 32, 35, 45, 
58, 64, 83, 109, 140, 169 ff., 209. 
See also Refuge 

Leaders, great ( niyyatdro ), xvi, 202 
Learners, 4, 19, 161; course for, 19, 
25; knowledge and lore of, 173 
Legal question (adhikarana), 113 n., 
114/. 

Lion, 335, 338/.; -posture, 20 /. 
Liquid element (dpo), 92 
Living creature (pdna), 33, 35, 42 /., 
289 

Lodgmg(s), 1 16 n., 129, 151, 153 /.; 
content with, 207 ff.; remote, 12, 
111/., 209 

Log of wood (kalingara), 121 ff. 
Longstanding (rattahnutg), 116 n. 
Lord (bhagavd), passim and 7, 120, 
159, 229, 232/., 278, 372; eightyish, 
306; eulogy of, 50 ff n 336, 338 /., 
356 ff.; knows, 156; a npble, 306; 
perfected one, etc., 21, 69, 181, 
251, 278, 282, 290, 302, 317, 353, 
358; $ Praise to . . xix, 296, 326; 
scorning, despising the, 238, 390; 
tames, calms, etc., 288; who knowB, 
sees, etc., 15#., 193, 261 #., 295/. 
Loss ( pdrijuiina ), four kinds of, 260/. 
Low (hind), 184#. 

Lustre (v anna), 230#., 237 , 



408 


Index of Topics 


Lying: deliberate, intentional, 87 /. f 
289; speech, 10, 80, and see 
Onslaught. . . . 

Malevolence (bydpada), 34, 95, 103 /., 
168, 226, 312; non-, 227 
mantra , 318 /., 327, 334 /., 341 
347, 356, 359 /., 379 n., 380 n. f 389 
Mastery, spheres of (abhibhdyatana), 
214/. 

Material shape (rupa), 80, 145 /., 

152 ff., 179, 180 n., 213 ff., 217; 
perception of, 16, 68, 106, 127; 
with four other khandha , 91, 105 /., 
164, 166, 190; with sound, smell, 
etc.. 11, 20, 66, 126, 183 ff., 237, 

392 

Material things (amisa), 155 /. 

Matted hair ascetic, 392 n. See under 
Keniya 

Meal, 247, 257 /., 279 /., 325, 331, 
333, 338; after, 12, 142, 285, 308; 
invite to a, 33 /., 61 ; not eating at 
night, 146 ff.; one a day, 10, 
156 n., 248, 277, 287 
Meat, 33; killed on purpose, 33 
Meditation(s) ( jhana ), xxxi/., 12, 15/., 
20 ff., 67, 105/., 112, 126/., 152 
201, 216 /., 227 ( first two), 233 /., 

393 (first turn), 401 

Memories and thoughts { sarasah - 
kappa), 126/. 

Mental realiser (kayasaklchin), 110 /., 
151 /. 

Mental objects, states (dhammd), 4, 
11, 21/., 330 

Mentality (dhamma), 138 ff. 

Merit ( punna ), 74, 195, 339; field of, 
118/.; de-, 35 

Messenger(s), 308; Death’s, 268 
Middle hall, 47/., 256 
Mind (citta); calmed, 183 ff.; com- 
posed, 12 /., 201, 235, 401; con- 
templating, 4; corrupted, 134; 
equipments of, xxii, 394 /., 397; 
freed, xii, xxxi /., 14, 15 ff., 113, 
165, 179 /., 219, 235, 330; obsessing 
the, 136/.; with, without attach- 
ment, etc., 173, 219, 225/.; without 
enmity, xxii, 394, 397. See also 
Friendliness; knowing by (cetasa), 
130, 173, 175, 219, 359, 390; ill-will 
of (mano), 43 

(Mind-) development (bhavana), 91,94 
ff.; developing, 222, 370, 394/;, 397 


Mindfulness (soli), 22 /., 31, 91, 
125 /., 134, 144, 212 /., 325; 
applications of, 4, 211, 337 n.; 
ariyan, 12; as faculty, 154, 212; 
on in-, out-breathing, 91 /., 96 
Minister, chief (mahdmaUa), 187, 209 
Misrepresent, to, 160 
Mode of livelihood, 223 /., 226 
Moderation in eating* xi, 20 ff., 144 
Monastery (drama), 325 
Monk(s), passim and ix, xii xxxi, 
32, 59, 109, 116 n., 129/., 138 ff., 
150, 168, 170, 172, 191, 302 ff.; 
forest-gone, 141 ff.; group of five, 
281; seven kinds of, xiv, 110, see 
also Persons; six sectarian, xiii, 
147 n ten endowments of, 118 
Moon and sun, 173, 188, 218, 231 /., 
237, 339, 390 

Moral habit, morality (sila), xi, 20 ff., 
mff., 209/., 248, 356/., 368, 380, 
399; ariyan, 11 /., 357; control in, 
287; higher, 209 /.; unskilled, 
skilled, 224/.; nothing to be added 
to, 226. See also Onslaught 
Morning star, 231 
Mother, 283 /., 288, 294, 303 
Motion-element (vayo), 93 
Mud-sprite, 229 
Mule, 346, 397 

Naked Ascetics, xvi /., xxiii, 161, 
197 ?i., 202, 277 n. 

Name, pronouncing the, xix, xxv /., 
303, 330 

Neither - perception - nor - non - per- 
ception, 68, 128, 213 
Nibbana, xv /., xxxii, 4, 5 n., 15 ff., 
81, 101, 106/., 110 n., 138 ff., 164, 
169/., 172, 188ff., 211 n 248, 272, 
332; final, 278, 288 n., 353 
Night, dense darkness of, 120 /., 
231 

Nobles, brahmans, householders, 
(recluses), 63, 182, 303, 305 
Nobles, brahmans, merchants, wor- 
kers, 49, 230, 274 ff., 310/., 342 ff., 
349, 366 ff. See also Caste 
Noise, 129, 192 /., (203), 206, 223, 
234, 287 

No-thing, plane of, 17, 68, 106, 128, 
213 

Non-return (andgdmitd), 156; -er(s) # 
xx, xxxii, (15 ff.), (106/.), (138#.), 
151 n., (332); (andgantar), 312 



Index of Topics 409 


Nuns, 45 /., 109, 116 139, 169 # ., 

209 

Nymphs (acchard), 258 

Objective ( ayaiana ), 173 ff. 
Obligations, 20, 209 
Observance (day), 232, 268, 270 ff. 
Ocean (Tathagata deep like), 166 
Offender (apattika), constant, oc- 
casional, 114/. 

Old age, 260 
Once-retumer, 139 /. 

Onslaught on creatures, etc., 10 /., 
26 /., 73, 168, 248, 276 #., 287, 
342 /., 368, 370 f. ; with asceticism 
(tapoguna), 233 
Ordain, to, 116 n. 

Order (of monks, disciples), xxi, 
xxiv, xxvii ff., 3 /., 108 ff., 116 /., 
130 /., 247, 303 ff., 339, 353 /., 
372; to lead ( pariharati ), xxvii, 
132. See also Refuge 
Ordination (upasampada), xvi, 69, 
172, 191, 236, 246, 252, 255, 338 
* Own body * (s akkaya), 102 ff. 

Pacittiya offence, 116 n. 

Parents, 246, 248/., 255/., 355, 357, 
373 ff.; consent of, 252 ff. 
parinibbana, xviii, xxiii ff., xxvii. See 
also Nibbana, final 
Past, future, present, xvii, xxix, 3, 
186/., 229/., 238 
Pavilion (rrmndalamala), 334 
Peaceful, more (santalara), 136 /. 
Perception(s), 16, 68, 96, 106, 127, 
213; three, 226; (another) three, 
227. See also Material shape (<w a 
khandha) 

Perfected one(s) (arahant), 3 /., 59, 
70 ff., 151 n., 175, 192, 255, 273, 
276 /., 289, 306, 318 /., 326, 329, 
333, 335, 339, 354, 386, 401; with 
cankers destroyed, etc., 4, 150, 168, 

201 /., 238 

Perils (adinava), 164, 392; (bhaya) 
136 n., of the water, 132 ff. 
Perplexity, 103, 169 /. 

Person, in respect of, with the 
(kdyena), 110 n., 162#., 173, 218, 
362 

Persons, seven types of, 151 ff.; see 
also Monks; four types of, 5, 81, 
125, 351 

Pith (sdra), 104, 167, 298 


Point of controversy (kathdvatthu), 
37#., 320 n. 

Potter (bhaggava), 248 
Powers, five 212 
Prince, x, xiv, 60#., 279 #. 

Principle (anvdhamma), 156 
Probation, xvi, 59, 172, 191 
Psychic power (iddhi), xxv, 43, 60, 
175, 320, 329/., 392; bases of 212; 
various forms of, 173, 218; wonder 
of, 285 

Purification, 23, 31, 76 #. 

Quarrel, etc., 80 


Raft, Parable of the, 128 n. 

Rains, 109 /., 250 n.; -residence, 247 
Real (santa), 106 /. 

Reasoner and investigator ( takki 
vxmarhsi), 200, 400 

Recluse, xxii, 32, 181, 277, 285 /., 
306, 366; shaveling, 244 /., 256, 
365, 399; unconquerable, 223 /., 
227; -ship, 87/., 123/., 194/., 198. 
See also Nobles . . . 

Recluse(s) and brahman(s), xix, xxii, 
43, 49, 70#., 90, 110, 177 /., 204, 
238, 251, 279, 298 /., 303, 309 /., 
312, 317, 358, 367, 386, 390, 394, 
399/. 

Recollect (anussarati) xvii, 22, 138 #., 
161. See also Habitations 
Refectory, 393 

Reflect, to (paccavekkhati), 88 #. 
Refuge, 291, 357 /.; threefold, xvi, 
xxiii /., 32, 35, 44/., 58/., 64, 83, 
167, 172, 180, 191, 236, 239, 248, 
278, 283/., 331, 349, 353, 366, 371, 
385, 397, 402 

Regard (pema), 115, 120, 154, 366 
Relations, 91, 260/. 

Released (mokkhu), 239 
Renunciation, 126, 149 n., 227, 389, 

393 /. 

Report (anussava), 199. 360 /., 400 
Requisites, 277, 287 /. 

Right path, dhamma, etc., 18 2, 193 ff., 
370/., 386/. 

Rites and customs, 103 
Robe, -material, 11, 108 /., 325; 
content with, 206 /. ; householder’s, 
208; rag-, 207 /.; three, 18, 288, 
300. See also Requisites 
Royalty, ix, xviii ff. 



410 


Index of Topics 


Sacrifice (yanna), xxii, 8 /., 338, 393 
Safe, to make oneself, xxxii, 18, 71, 
76, 78 

Sage (muni), 329 /. 

Sarhgka , xxviii 
Sarhsdra , 267 

Satisfaction, peril, escape, 34, 183 /., 
187 

Seats (dsana), 142 

Sects, xvi, xxi, xxv, 40, 44, 46, 69, 

110, 162, 172, 189, 191, 204, 209 

Security (from the bonds), 16 #, 23, 
161, 188/. 

Seer(s), (id), 43, 347 #, 360, 389 
Self: -awakening, 126; Brahma- 
become, see Tormentors; * hale 
231; happy, 233; hurt, torment of, 
34, 89 /., 298 /., 326; pure, 10; 
reveal, 336; -torment, see Tormen- 
tors; upbraid, 27, 111/.; not-, 105/. 
Self-Awakened One(s), 3 /., 9, 60, 
243, 319, 335, 337, 398, 401 ; ‘ is the 
Lord \ etc,, 303 # 

Sense: impingements, 67 /., 66 
211 n.; impressions, 94 /,, 106, 
127 

Sense-organs, 20 #, 134, 143/,, 161, 
153 /., 186, 194, 217; ariyan 
control over, 11 /., 21 
Sense-pleasures, x, xv, xxxii, 28 ff., 
103, 136 /., 184 ff., 267, 330, 357, 
392 /.; enjoyer(s) of, 169 ff.; five 
strands of, 66, 126, 134, 184/., 187, 
237 /., 264, 303, 392; human and 
dew-like, 185, 268-9; with malevo- 
lence, harming, 226. See also 
Onslaught on creatures 
Service (paricariyd), 366 ff. 

Shadow, 320 

Shelve the question, to, 114/., 229 
silasampanna, xi 
Similes, see Index II 
Skeleton, 28 

Skill, -ed, unskill, -ed, xix, 89/., 105, 
120 /., 136, 149 /., 167 /., 211 /., 
223 /., 282, 299, 388, 392 ff.; 
conduct, 298 /. ; intentions, 226 /. ; 
moral habits, 224 ff. ; stance, 72 /,, 
75 /., 78 /.; states of mind, 
225 # 

Sleeping place (seyyd), 181 
Smile, see Gotama 

Something to be done (karanlya), 

150#, 186, 378/. 

Son, 312 


Sound (ghosa), 273# 

Space-element (akasa), 93 
Speech: false, 71; pleasant, wrong, 
143; to utter a, 60, 62 /., 391. See 
also Body, speech 

Spreading of grass (tiiiasantharaka), 
181/. 

Stick, 9; and sword, xviii, 10, 80, 
288, 305, 319 
Stable, the (aninjita), 127 
Stopping ( nirodha ), 96, 101, 110 
162 n., 164, 213, 225#; liable to, 
15 #; of becomings, 80 /.; of 
perception and feeling, xxxii, 68 /., 
128,213 

Stream-attain-er, -ment, 139 /., 
152 n., 153 n., 226 n. 

Strive, to (padahati), 155, 225 #, 
362/. 

Striving (padhana), 155, 281, 310 /., 
363, 401 ; five qualities for, 282 /, 
310/.; four right, 211 
Suchness (tathattd), 138 # 

Suicide, 295 

Super-knowledge (abhihna), 23, 31, 
57 #, 101, 151, 153 /., 160, 164, 
168 /., 175, 180, 191, 194, 210 #, 
221, 251, 255, 281, 283, 289, 306, 
339, 389, 400 
Sword and turban, 302 
Sympathetic joy, 34, 95; mind of, 
16, 34, 269, 378, 396. See also 
Abiding in friendliness 
Synonym (adhivacana), 132 # 

Talk, inferior (tiracchanakatha), 192, 
203, 223, 228; irresponsible, 230; 
settled, 232 /. 

TathSgata, xiii, xxii, xxviii /., 
xxxi /., 9, 21, 36, 60, 62#, 69, 82, 
132 n., 137/., 153/., 164#, 262, 
268, 294, 32 In., 370/., 395, 398;, 
after dying, xxii, 97 /., 163 /.; 
and views, 97 #, 162 #; arises in 
the world, etc., 9, 201, 234; controls 
eye, ear, etc., 183; deep, 166; 
dissociated from material things, 
156; freed, 165 /.; heir to, 337; 
khandhas seen, got rid of by, 164, 
166; as a leader (vinayaka), 281, 
283; not the purpose of, 138, 
140/.; rid of unskill, 299; smiles, 
243, 268 

Teacher, 111 /., 156, 193 #, 200 /., 
236, 335, 349, 356 #, 389 



Index of Topics 411 


Teacher’s instruction, 109 ff., 156, 
169/., 180 

Test, to, 155, 362, 364 
1 There is no cause etc., 76 ff., 195 
Thief, 276 /. 

Things (dhamma) \ fifteen, 24 n.; 
five, 206, 209, 360; five brahman, 
388 /., 393 /., 397 : rooted in the 
Lord, 138 ; seven excellent, xi, 20 ff. ; 
two, 173; three, 168 
‘ This is not mine ’, etc., 91 ff . 

Time; right 63, 133; wrong, 120, 133, 
142, 147/. 

Tormentors, xi, xxiv, xxxi, 5 ff., 
14/., 81/., 351/. 

Trading, 387 /. 

Training 108 ff. ; rules of, 20, 108 ff., 
115/., 206; to disavow, 132 ff., 257 
Tranquillity, 126 

Transcending, the ( samatikkama ), 127 
Transgression ( accaya ), 109 ff. 
Trapper (migava), 259 
Treasures, seven, 319 
Tree: roots of, 12, 111 /., 119, 209; 
with fruit, 30 /. 

Truth (sacca), 162 ff., 111 f., 359, 388; 
highest, 155, 362; preserving, etc., 
361 ff.; as protestation, 289; 
( tatha ) 294; truths (dhamma), 291, 
400 

Turning away from, dispassion . . . 
nibbana, 101, 164, 272 

Unaffected ( avyaseka ), 11 
Unconcerned (appossukka), 122 /., 
125, 131, 304 
Unison, 156 

Unstable, the, (ihjita), 127 
Upbraid, to (upavadati), 27, 111/. 
Uprising ( upapatti ), 41, 57, 138, 141, 
176 n . 

Utterance, solemn (uddna), 187, 237, 
290, 397, 398 

Vedas, 317 /., 327 , 334 , 340 , 356 , 
358, 359 379 n ., 380, 385, 398, 

400 

Viceroy, 269 

View(s), xxi /., 164, 177 /., 193; 
another, 238; right, 13, 73, 76, 78, 
168, 174, 221, 343, 368; wrong, 
false, 13, 65/., 71/., 74/., 78, 116 n., 
168, 174, 220, 342, 347, 368; won 
to, 110, 151, 153; ‘AH is (not) 
pleasing’, xxii, 176 /.; ‘From 


doing’, etc., 73 ff,, 195; Life- 
principle and body, 97 ff., 163 /.; 
‘ Tathagata is (not) after dying ’, 
etc., xxii, 97, 163 ff. ; * There is 
(not) ’, 72 /., 194; ‘ There is (no) 
cause etc., 76 ff,, 195; ‘ There is 
(not) formlessness ’, xxi, 79 /. ; 
‘ There is (no) result *, etc., 70 ff., 

193 /.; ‘ There is (not) stopping of 
becomings xxi, 80 /. ; ‘ These 
seven classes are (not) made *, etc., 

196 ff.; ‘World is (not) eternal*, 
etc., xxii, 97, 162 jgf. 

Vigilance, xi, 20 ff., 144 
Vijjdcaranasampanna, xi, 24 
Village, entering a, 142; staying near, 
146 

Walk, stand still, etc., 159/., 199, 202, 
228/. 

Wanderers), ix /., xiv ff., 3, 32, 
102 /., 116 n., 159, 189, 192 ff., 

197 n„ 203, 222, 268 n., 340 /.; 
company of, 192 /., 203, 222, 228, 
234, 236, 298 n discourse, 182/.; 
park, 159, 203, 228; teachers of, 
188, 230, 232 ff. 

Watch, fourfold (Jain), 41 
Watch and ward, 277, 287 
Water, 41 ( Jain attitude to), 87, 94, 

194 

Way, 330; eightfold, 188/., 213, 272; 
tenfold, 227 

Wealth: (bhoga), 134, 260 /.; (san- 
dhana), xxii, 368 /. 

Weigh (things) up, 155, 362 /. 
Welcome, a ( sagata ), 159 
Wheel: to turn, 337; tum-er, -in g, 
318, 336 /.; of dhamma , 337 
Whole (kevalin), 329/., 380 
White; clothed in, 169 ff., 223; 

cloths, 280 
Wife, 294, 372/. 

Will ( cetand ), 58 

Wind, 95, 194 

Windows, 209 

Wisdom (pahnd), 22, 28 ff., 91 ff., 
138 ff., 144, 149 /., 152 ff., 212, 
282, 296, 311, 362, 368, 398; as 
faculty, 164, 212; higher, 210; 
lucidity of, 397. See also Freedom 
through 

Wish, to, 173 ff. 

Women: (itthi), 121, (in labour) 288; 
(mdtugama), 121, 134 



412 Index of Similes 

World: beyond, 71 ff,; exclusively Wrong (dan^a), 36 /♦, 39, 41 /. 
happy, 232 ff, ; instable, no refuge, 
not one’s own, lacks, 261 ff; 

‘ is (not) eternal % etc,, xxii, 97, Youth, radiant ( bhadra yobbana), 136, 
162 ff,; ’s veil, 319, 365; -ly life 260, 2B1, 357, 401 
(gehasita), 149 ». 

II — SIMILES 


Arrow and reed, 217 

baby boy, 62, 102, 223, 238 

ball of thread, 198 

bath attendant, 216 

belle of the countryside, 230, 237 

Benares muslin, 214 /. 

bird on the wing, 11 

blind men, 360, 389 

borrowed wealth, 30 

calf, 130 

cattle-butcher, 376 
clean cloth, 45, 330 
conch blower, 219, 396 

distiller, 39 

ditchers, fletehers, joiners, 290 
dream, 30 
drops of water, 125 
drunkard, 39 
dyed monkey, 49 

earth, water, fire, air, wind, 94 /. 
elephant-bonds, 122 
elephant playing, 39 
elephant-riding, 281 
elephant’s trunk, 88 
elephants, horses, oxen to be tamed, 
310/. 

emerald jewel, 217, 231 

fire and fuel, 165 /„, 311, 369, 392 
flax blossom, 214 
fruits of a tree, 30 /. 

Ganges to sea, 172 
gelder, gouger, 48 
grass torch, 29 

heap of flowers, 53 
hen and eggs, 23 
house with eleven doors, 18 
hungry dog, 28 

iron hook, 61 /. 

leper, 185 ff. 


lotus-pond, 216 

lump of flesh, 28 

man blind from birth, 188, 190, 390 

man crossing Ganges, 104 /. 

man fully clothed, 217 

man going from village to village, 220 

man pressing out honey, 206 

man with hands and feet cut off, 202 

man with one eye, 115 

milk and water, 66, 303 

mirror, 88 

moon, 290 

morning star, 215 

palm-tree, 137 

pit of glowing embers, 29 

pith, 104 

poisoned arrow, 99 

pool of water, 216, 221 

poor man, 367, 369 

poor man’s bonds, 123 

potter, ivory worker, goldsmith, 218 

quail, 121 

reflection in a mirror, 219 
rich householder, 184 
rich householder’s bonds, 124 
river in spate, 300 

sal-timber, 166 
seeds, 130 

setting upright, etc,, 32, 58, 64, 83, 
167, 172, 180, 191, 236, (239), 278, 
331, 352, (366), (385), 396, 402 
snake and slough, 218 
strong man, 39, 130 
strong man torturing, 376 
sword and scabbard, 218 

thoroughbred colt, 117 
treasure, 17 
two houses, 221 
two strong men, 376 

water and water- vessel, 87 /. 
water-pot, 236 



Index of Names 


413 


III— NAMES 


Abhaya, prince, 60 ff. 

Aciravati, river, 297, 300 
A ggannasuUanta, 386 n. 

Ajatasattu, xviii /., xxvii n., 300 
Ajita kesakambalin, 193 n., 204 /. 
Ambalatthika, 87 
A mbatthasuttanUiy xi, 24 n. 

Ananda, xiii, xix/., 14/., 17/., 19/., 
24, 65 ff., 103 jgT., 129, 132 n„ 136, 
192/., 198, 200 jgf., 243 Jjf., 268#, 
280, 296#., 312/. 

Anathapinqiika, xxvi; ’s monastery, 
.see under Savatth! 

Ariga, 353 

Ariga-Magadha, people of, 204 
Arigirasa, 360, 389 
Angulimala, xiii, xviii, 284 ff. 
Anguttarapa, 25, 119, 332, 334 
Anna-Kondanna, xxv 
Anugara, wanderer, 203 
Anuruddha, 135 ff . 

Apana, 25, 119, 332, 334 

Arittha, 116 

Asita Bevala, 347 ff, 

Asoka, 87 n., 236 n. 

Assagutta, 236 n. 

Assaji, 147 /. 

Assalayana, 340 ff, 

Atthaka, brahman, 360, 389 
Atthaka, town, 14# 

Avantiputta, xxiii /., 273 ff, 

Avydvata S amyutta, 167 n. 

Bamboo Grove, 60, 87, 141, 167, 203, 
228, 372 /. 

Barua, B, M., 77 n. 

Basham, A. L., 41 n., 77 n., 161 n., 
193 n. f 196 n. 

Bavarin, 320 n. 

Benares, 246 ff„ 350 
Bhaddali, 108 ff, 

Bhaggaa, 279, 284 
Bhagu, brahman, 360, 389 
Bhagu, disciple, 135 
Bharadvaja, brahman, 360, 389 
Bharadvaja (-clan), 181 /., 359 ff., 
379 ff., 397, 400 ff. 
Bhayabheravasutta , 24 n. 

Bhesakala Grove, 279, 284 
Bimbisara, 287, 334, 358 
Boar’s Cave, 176 
Bodhi, prince, 279 ff. 


Brahma(s), xxix /., 49, 69, 313 /., 
317, 385; companionship with, 
377 ff., 395 /. 

Brahma Sahampati, 130 /. 

BrahmS, Sanahkumara, 24, 326 n. 
Brahmayu, xix, xxi, xxv, 317 #.‘ 
Buddhaghosa, xxvi, 321 n. 

CampS, 3, 5 
Can<Jalakappa, 398 /. 

Cankl, brahman, xxi, 354 ff., 379, 
391 

Catuma, 12% ff. 

Catumasutta, xxvii 
Chalmers, Lord, xv, 36 n., 182 n., 
205 n 259 n 265 n ., 269 n., 
306 n 307 n ., 324 n ., 332 n . 
Childers, R., 118 n., 346 n. 

Cock’s monastery, 14 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 62 n ., 64 n., 
217 321 n. 

Cula-Sumana, 151 n. 

Dan^aka, forest, 43 
Bandekar, R. N., 318 n., 380 n. 
Basama, 14 ff. 

Bevadatta, xxvii, 60 /., 132 n., 
335 fi. 

Bevaka^a Pool, 192 
Bhananjani, xxix /., 372 ff. 
Bhananjani, xix, 398/. 

Bigha Ka ray ana, 301 /., 303 n. 
Bighanakha, wanderer, 176 ff. 
Bighatapassin, Jain, 36 ff., 45 ff. 
Butt, S., xxviii 

Eastern monastery, 296 
Ekapundarlka: (elephant) 297; (park) 
159 ' 

Esukari, 366 ff. 

Fig-tree Cave, 192 

Gabled House, 159 
Gagga, 288 
Ganges, 73 /., 257 
Ghatikara, 243 ff. 

Ghosita’s monastery, 192, 283 
Ghotamukha, xxiv, 350 ff. 

Godage, C. E., 52 n. 

Gotama, x, xii /., xv ff., xx ff., xxv, 
xxviii, 3, 25 /., 33, 37 ff., 44 ff.. 



Index of Names 


414 

60 #., 83, 169 #., 162 #., 167 #., 
177, 180, 181 #., 192, 203, 204 #., 
223, 236, 238 /., 261, 279, 293, 
306, 309, 317 /., 320 #., 332 #., 
340#., 363, 354 jQT., 366#., 380/., 
385, 386 #., 399 #.; autobio- 
graphical, 184, 281, 400/.; praised 
(pasattha), 397; qualities esteemed 
in, 323 #., 356 #.; revered by 
disciples, 205 #. ; smiles, 243, 
267 /. ; voice, 326 
Gulissani, xiv, 141 
Gunda Grove, 273 

Haliddavasana, 54 
Hare, E. M,, 381 n . 

Icchanankala, 379 /. 

Indra, xxvi n., 212 n. 

Indriyajataka, 347 n. 

Isidatta, equerry, 306 
Isipatana, 246 

Jacobi, H., 36 n. 

Janussoni, 379, 391, 397 
Jeta Grove. See under Savatthl 
Jlvaka Komarabhacca, 32#. 

Jones, J. J., xxxiii 
Jotipala, brahman, 244 #., 250 

Kaccana the Great, xxiii /., 273#. 
Kala(ka), 347 ». 

Kalarajanaka, 272 
Kalinga, forest, 43 
Kamboja, 341/. 

Kamm§esadhamma, 181 
Kandaka, novice, 116 n . 

Kandaraka, 3 /. 

Kannakatthala, 307 
Kapathika, brahman, xxi, 354 n., 
358#. 

Kapilavatthu, 18/., 25 
Kasi, 146/., 295/. 

Kassapa, brahman, 360, 389 
Kassapa, Buddha, 243 #. 

Keniya, jafila , 332 #., 338 /. 
Kliemiya Mango Grove, 350 
Kikf, king, 246 /, 250 
Kimbila, 135 

Kisa Sahkicca, 197 n. t 202 
Kltagiri, 147 
Kokanada, palace, 279 /. 

Kosalan(s), 69, 135, 243, 295/., 306, 
354, 391, 398/. 


KosambI, 192, 283 
Kun<jadh£na, 135 

Kurus, 181, 250; king of, 256, 259#. 

Lamotte, Et., 211 n., 320 n. 
Licchavis, 287 


Madhura, 273 

Magandiya, xv /., 69 n., 181 #. 
Magandiyasutta , xv/, 

Mahanama, 20 #. 

Majjhima-Nikaya, ix #., xxx; 
- bhanaka , xxviii 

Makhadeva, 267 #.; Mango Grove, 
267, 269/., 326/. 

Makkhali Gosala, 76 n., 77 n, f 161 n., 
196 w,, 197 n., 202, 204/. 

Mallika, xviii /., 293 #. 

Mallika’s park, 222 
Ma luhky aputta, xiii, 97#., 102#. 
Manatthaddha, xxv 
MantanI, 288 

Mara(s), 49, 69, 317 337#. 

Matali, charioteer, 271 /. 

Matanga, forest, 43 
Medalumpa, 301 /. 

Mehta, P., xxxiii, 319 n. 

Mejjha, forest, 43 
Migara’s mother, palace of, 296 
Mithila, 267/., 271 /., 317, 320, 326/. 
Moggallana, xxvii /., 107 n. t 129, 
131 /., 146, 162 n., 367 ». 

Monier- Williams, 36 w. 


Nalakapana, 135 
Nalakara, 395 
Na landa, 36, 42 #. 

Nalijangha, brahman, 293 #. 

Nanda Vaccha, 197 n., 202 
Nandana Grove, 185 
Nandiya, 135 
Narigaraka, 301 /, 

Nataputta, Jain, 36#,, 46 #., 50, 64, 
60#., 204/., 229 

Neumann, E. K., 36 n. t 307 n., 
324 n., 346 n. 

Nig rod ha’s monastery, 18 
Nimi, king, 270 #. 

Nimijataka , 267 «., 271 n. 

Niraya Hell, 13, 55#., 71 /., 75, 78, 
174, 221, 224 w., 271 w., 275, 290, 
342, 373/., 377; guardians of, 373/. 
Northern Mountain, 372 /. 



Index of Names 415 


On© Hall, 222 
Opasada, 354 ff., 358 

Pakudha Kaccayana, 196 n., 204 /, 
Pancakariga, carpenter, 64 n., 222 ff. 
Pasenadi, xvi n., xviii #., xxv, 284, 
287 /., 293, 295 /., 297 ff., 301 ff., 
307 JgT., 354, 356, 358, 379 n. f 397 
Pataliputta, 14/., 18, 353/. 

Pava, 54 

Pavarika’s Mango Grove, 36, 40 
Peacocks’ feeding place, 203, 228 
Pessa, 3 ff. 

Pokkharasati, 189 n 356, 358, 

379/., 390 ff. 

Potaliya, 25 ff. 

Potthapada, wanderer, 222 n. 
Punabbusaka, 147/. 

Punna, bovine ascetic, 54 ff. 

Punna, brahman, 349 
Punnika, slave, 390 
Parana, equerry, 306 
Purana Kassapa, xxi, 73 197 n. t 

204/. 

Rahula, xiii, 87 ff., 91 ff. 

Rajagaha, xxvii, 32, 60, 87, 141, 
167, 176, 203/., 228, 236 372 /. 

Rattapani, dyer, 49 /. 

Ratthapala, xiii, 251 ff. 

Revata, 135 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. xvii n. t 61 n. t 
72 n., 265 n. 

Robinson, R., 336 n. 

Sakka, 270 /., 385 
Sakula, 308/. 

Sakuludayin, wanderer, xvii, 203 ff., 
228 ff. 

Sakyans, 18 /., 25, 130 /., 251, 301, 
317, 326/., 332, 355, 380 
Sal Grove, 354 /., 358 
Sala, 69 

Samanamandika’s son (Uggahamana), 

222 /. 

Sdmannaphalasuttanta, xi /., 20 n. 
Sampasadaniyasuttanta, xxvii 
Sandaka, wanderer, xvi, 192 ff. 
Sangarava, xx /., 398 ff. 

Sanjaya, brahman, 309, 313 
Sanjaya Belatthiputta, 204 /. 
Saiijika’s son, brahman, 279 /. 
Sariputta, 91, 94 ' n., 107 n., 129, 
131 /., 141, 146, 176 n., 180, 337, 
357 n 372 ff.; attains arahantship. 


180; rebukes to, xiii /., xxvi ff., 
131 379 

Savatthi, 64, 91, 97, 102, 107, 109 /., 
129 n., 162, 222 /., 236, 255, 
284 //., 292, 294, 296 /., 340, 366, 
386, 397 
Sekkasutta, xi /. 

Sela, brahman, 334 ff. 

Seniya, canine ascetic, xvi, 54 ff. 
Siha, General, xii, 44 n. 

Sirima, courtesan, 258 n. 

Siriva^dha, 297 
Soma, 308 /, 

Subha Todeyyaputta, xxx, 386 ff. 
Subhaga glade, 390 ff. 

Sudhamma hall, 270 /. 
Sumsumaragira, 279, 284 

Tandulapala Gateway, 372 
Tarukkha, 379 /., 391 
Tevijjasuttanta, 385 n. 

Thomas, E. J,, 161 n. 

Thullakotthita, 251, 255 /., 259, 261 
Todeyya, brahman, 379, 391 399 n. 
Tudi, 386 n., 399 

Udayin, 64 ff., 119 jgf. 

Udena, xxiv, 350 ff. 

Uggahamana, wanderer, 222 /. 
Ujuiiiia, 307 /. 

Ukkattha, 379 n., 390 n. 

Upali, householder, xii, xv, xxi, 38 ff. 
Upamanna (clan), 390 ff. 

Upasena Yangantaputta, 116 n. 
Uttara, brahman, 318 ff. 

Uttarapa, 25 n. 

Vacchagotta, xvi /., 59 n., 159 ff., 
162#, 167#. 

Vajiri, 295 
Vamadeva, 360, 389 
Vamaka, 360, 389 
Vappa the Sakyan, xii 
Varadhara, wanderer, 203 
Vasabha, 295 

Vasettha, brahman, 360, 389 
Vasettha, brahman youth, 379 ff. 
Vebhalihga, 243,. 246 ff. 

V edanapariggahanasuttanta, 176 n. 
Vekhanassa, wanderer, 236 ff. 

Vesali, 14, 18, 159, 287 
Vessamitta, 360, 389 
Vidudabha, xviii, xx, 295* 303 n., 
309, 312 /. 

Videha, 270 /., 317, 319 /., 326, 331 



416 


Index of Some Pali Words in the Notes 

Vinaya , ix, xiii, xvi, xxviii Yamataggi, 360, 389 

Vipassin, Buddha, xvii, 62 »., 161 n. Yasoja, 129 n. 

Vulture Peak, 176 Yona, 341 /. 

Woodward, F. L., xxx 

IV— SOME PALI WORDS IN THE NOTES 


akiriyavada , 76 

atekiccha , 61 

attacatuitha , 61 

anavala , 323 

anuhkama , 118 

appdf,ihirahata, 210, 230 

abhiiindvosd naparamippalta, 211 

abhidhamma abhivinaya , 146 

aiamatto, 262 

avyasekasukha , 11 

dkdsa, 17, 94 

acamehi , 296 

ayaiana , 173 

upakkhalitvd , 398 

ubhatobhagavimutta, 151 

kammavadin kiriyavadin, 161 

kammavipdkay 291 

kayasakkhin t 110, 152 

kdlika, 147 

kuddam nismya , 256 

chalabkijdti, 77 197 

jalahatthapada , 321 

taaalfcdmra, 290 


dap4a, 36, 306 

dhammacetiya , 307 

dhammadhatu, 64 

dhammarajd , 318 

dhammika , 277 

im vimuceali , 105 

ndmakdya , 151, 152, 155 

padaka , 52 

padcsa , 343 

pasayha , 285 

purindada Sakha , 62 

phassitva , 151 

bhavanetti , 291 

bhunahu , 181 

mania, 318, 319 

mahatta, 116 

migava , 259 

ratlannuta , 116 

labhagga, 116 

5a66at’drwdnto, 41 

aliavd hoti no ca silamayo , 226 

hatthatthara, 259 



