The Way of Perfect Outshining
A Selection from the Reality-Teaching
of His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

An excerpt from the book

Perfect Philosophy

Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877-770-0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)
Learn more about Avatar Adi Da
at www.adidam.org

The Way of Perfect Outshining
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

1

The Way of Perfect Outshining
I.
All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is, "itself", a deadend of entropic fire, yielding only and at last to an indivisible uniformity of inert time and
spaceless light—await to same's explosion of bang-repeat.
All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is non-necessity—a
cosmic "fault" of all "it" seems upon a broken space of time-bound light.
All of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" is a suffered
happening, always present as divorce from all the what "it" seeks—except Reality Itself Be
Happened stead of mummery's happen and "its" pain of would-be's Not-Yet-Gone-Around.
Only What Is Perfect Shines As "Bright" As Perfect Is.
Therefore, why go seeking for The Real—when Only What Is Real Is smallest hind at
every breath, before a "self" or "world" or "universe" is seemed to suffer life and light at any
large?
II.
The conditionally arising apparent "world" is a context of opposites, "differences",
separateness, change, diminishment, timed cessation, untimely ending, timeless death--and
always repetitions.
The conditionally arising apparent "universe" will (apparently) expand indefinitely, into a
gray eventless state--but, coincidently, "it" inherently (and paradoxically) always coincides with
the seed and characteristic of merely repetition (or of perpetual re-"emergence", same as was,
and same as same, and same as merely seeming seems).
The conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or embodied "self", or psycho-physical
"entity") is inherently not-separate from the conditionally arising apparent "world"--and,
therefore, the conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or psycho-physically embodied "point of
view") is a context exactly in the mode of the conditionally arising apparent "world".
Coincidently, the conditionally arising apparent "individual" (or psycho-physical "selfentity", or psycho-physically embodied "point of view"), like the conditionally arising apparent
"universe", inevitably changes toward and into death, while, also, paradoxically, "it" always
repeats "itself" (and, thus, perpetually re-"emerges", as "it" was, and same, and seeming as "it"
seems, and seeming same as merely seeming seems to seem).
The Tacit and Direct (or Always Prior) Self-Realization of The Inherently egoless
Transcendental Spiritual (and Self-Evidently Divine) Self-Nature, Self-Condition, and Self-State
of Reality (Itself) Is The Intrinsic Transcending—and, at Perfect last, The Absolute (and
Transcendental Spiritual) Outshining—of the conditionally (or psycho-physically) arising
apparent "self-entity" and the totality of conditionally arising apparent "world" and "universe".
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

The Way of Perfect Outshining
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

2

The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam—Which Is The Way of Tacit and Direct (or Always Prior) Self-Realization of The
Inherently egoless Transcendental Spiritual (and Self-Evidently Divine) Self-Nature, SelfCondition, and Self-State of Reality Itself—Is The Way of The Intrinsic Transcending and (at
Perfect last) The Absolute (and Transcendental Spiritual) Outshining of conditionally arising
apparent "self" and "world" and "universe".
Nevertheless, The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect
Reality-Way) of Adidam is not a path of seeking to "cause" separation from conditionally arising
apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" as an "effect" of any kind of strategic effort or
"method".
The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Intrinsically Self-Realizes Inherent Transcending of ego-"I" (or conditionally arising
apparent separate "self") at and from the beginning.
At Perfect last—without any seeking-effort to "cause" (or, by dissociative or separative
means, to achieve) separation from the totality of conditionally arising apparent "world" and
"universe"—The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect RealityWay) of Adidam inevitably and Perfectly Self-Manifests As The Perfect Self-Recognition and
The Absolute Outshining (or Divine Translation) of the conditionally arising apparent body-mind
(or psycho-physically embodied space-time-"point-of-view") and the totality of conditionally
arising apparent "world" and "universe".
At Perfect last, The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect
Reality-Way) of Adidam Perfectly Self-Manifests The Absolute Outshining (or Divine
Translation) of conditionally arising apparent "self" and "world" and "universe" In and As The
One and Indivisible Conscious Light That Is Inherently egoless, Perfectly deathless,
Transcendental, Spiritual, Only Love-Bliss-Full, and Self-Evidently Divine Reality Itself.
III.
The intrinsic "fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or of bondage to psycho-physically
embodied "point of view") is dissociative (or separative, and dualizing, and "difference"presuming) "objectification" of "self", "other", "thing", "world", and "universe".
The intrinsic "fault" of all seeking to "cure" the intrinsic "fault" of space-time"locatedness" (or bondage to psycho-physically embodied "point of view") is dissociative (or
separative, and dualizing, and "difference"-presuming) introversion—or dissociative
discrimination between presumed "self" and presumed "not-self".
The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Always Already (Inherently and Perfectly) Transcends (and Inherently Perfectly
Relinquishes) both the intrinsic "fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or bondage to psychophysically embodied "point of view") and the intrinsic "fault" of all seeking to "cure" the intrinsic
"fault" of space-time-"locatedness" (or bondage to psycho-physically embodied "point of view").
Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

The Way of Perfect Outshining
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj

3

The only-by-Me Revealed and Given Seventh Way (or Inherently Perfect Reality-Way) of
Adidam Is The Way of Perfect Outshining.

An excerpt from the book Perfect Philosophy
by His Divine Presence, Avatar Adi Da Samraj
Available online at DawnHorsePress.com
or by calling 877.770.0772 (within the US)
707.928.6590 (from outside the US)

Reprinted from www.adidam.org
© 2009 The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam Pty Ltd,
as trustee for The Avataric Samrajya of Adidam.
All rights reserved. Perpetual copyright claimed.

